:icons:
:toc2:
:toc-placement: manual
:numbered:

image::images/Subsurface4Banner.jpg["Banner", align="center"]

[big]#MANUEL UTILISATEUR#

*Auteurs du manuel* : Willem Ferguson, Jacco van Koll, Dirk Hohndel, Reinout Hoornweg,
Linus Torvalds, Miika Turkia, Amit Chaudhuri, Jan Schubert, Salvador Cuñat, Pedro Neves

[blue]#_Version 4.5, Octobre 2015_#


Bienvenue en tant qu'utilisateur de _Subsurface_, un programme avancé
d'enregistrement de plongées (carnet de plongées) avec une bonne
infrastructure pour décrire, organiser, interpréter et imprimer des plongées
en scaphandre et en apnée. _Subsurface_ offre de nombreux avantages par
rapport à d'autres solutions logicielles similaires :

 - Avez-vous besoin d'une façon d'enregistrer vos plongées utilisant des
   équipements loisirs, même sans utiliser d'ordinateur de plongée ?
 - Utilisez-vous deux marques différentes d'ordinateurs de plongée, chacun avec
   son propre logiciel propriétaire pour télécharger les enregistrements des
   plongées ? Plongez-vous avec un recycleur ou un équipement en circuit ouvert
   ou de loisir ? Utilisez-vous un enregistreur de profondeur et de durée
   Reefnet Sensus avec un ordinateur de plongée ? _Subsurface_ offre une
   interface standard pour télécharger les enregistrements des plongées à
   partir de tous ces équipements de plongée, en enregistrant et en analysant
   ces enregistrements dans un système unique.
 - Utilisez-vous plus d'un système d'exploitation ? _Subsurface_ est
   intégralement compatible avec Mac, Linux et Windows, ce qui vous permet
   d'accéder à vos enregistrements de plongées sur chaque système
   d'exploitation en utilisant une application unique.
 - Utilisez-vous Linux ou Mac mais votre ordinateur de plongée n'a que des
   logiciels pour Windows pour télécharger les informations de plongées (par
   exemple Mares) ? _Subsurface_ fournit un moyen de télécharger et d'analyser
   vos enregistrements de plongées sur d'autres systèmes d'exploitation.
 - Avez-vous besoin d'un planificateur de plongée graphique intuitif qui
   intègre et prend en compte les plongées qui ont déjà été enregistrées ?
Avez-vous besoin d'un moyen d'nregistrer et de sauvegarder vos plongées sur
Internet, vous permettant de les voir depuis n'importe où en utilisant un
navigateur Internet ? _Subsurface_ est disponible pour Windows (Win XP ou
plus récent), les Macs basés sur processeurs Intel (OS/X) et de nombreuses
distributions Linux. _Subsurface_ peut être compilé pour bien plus de
plateformes matérielles et d'environnements logiciels où Qt et
libdivecomputer sont disponibles.

Ce manuel explique comment utiliser le programme _Subsurface_. Pour
installer le logiciel, consultez la page _Téléchargement_ sur le
http://subsurface-divelog.org/[site web de _Subsurface_]. En cas de
problème, vous pouvez envoyer un e-mail sur
mailto:subsurface@subsurface-divelog.org[notre liste de diffusion] et
rapportez les bogues sur https://github.com/Subsurface-divelog/subsurface/issues[notre bugtracker].  Pour
des instructions de compilation du logiciel et (si besoin) de ses
dépendances, merci de consulter le fichier INSTALL inclus dans les sources
logicielles.

*Public* : Plongeurs loisirs, apnéistes, plongeurs Tek et plongeurs
professionnels

toc::[]


Utilisation de ce manuel
------------------------
When opened from within _Subsurface_, this manual does not have external
controls for paging or selecting previous pages. However, two facilities are
provided:

The _SEARCH_ function is activated by pressing control-F or command-F on the
keyboard. A text box appears at the bottom right-hand of the window (see
image below).  For instance, typing the word "_weights_" into the search
text box, searches throughout the user manual. To the right of the search
text box are two arrows pointing up and down. These find the previous and
the next occurrence of the search term.

image::images/UserManualSearch.jpg["User manual functions", align="center"]


_PREVIOUS/NEXT LINK_. Move between links (underlined words that jump to
specific sections in the user manual) by right-clicking on the text of the
manual.  This brings up a context menu to PREVIOUS links selected.  (see
image below). For instance if a link has been selected, then the option to
_Go Back_ shows the text at the previous link selected (similar to the
Previous Page button in a browser). Conversely the _Go Forward_ option jumps
to the text seen before selecting the _Go Back_ option. The _Reload_ option
reloads the complete user manual into the window.

image::images/UserManualLinksBack.jpg["User manual functions", align="center"]


[[S_UserSurvey]]
Le sondage utilisateur
----------------------
Dans le but de développer _Subsurface_ pour servir ses utilisateurs de la
meilleur manière qu'il soit, il est important d'avoir des informations sur
les utilisateurs. À l'ouverture de _Subsurface_ après avoir utilisé le
logiciel pendant une semaine environ, une fenêtre de sondage apparait. Cela
est complètement optionnel et l'utilisateur contrôle quelles informations
sont envoyées ou non à l'équipe de développement de _Subsurface_. Toutes les
données que l'utilisateur envoie sont utiles et ne seront utilisées que pour
les futurs développements et modifications du logiciel pour coller au mieux
aux besoins des utilisateurs de _Subsurface_. Si vous complétez le sondage
ou cliquez sur l'option pour ne plus être sondé, cela devrait être la
dernière communication de ce type que vous recevrez. Cependant, si vos
habitudes de plongées ou d'utilisation de Subsurface changent, vous pouvez
envoyer un nouveau sondage en démarrant _Subsurface_ avec l'option
_--survey_ sur la ligne de commande.

[[S_StartUsing]]
Commencer à utiliser le programme
---------------------------------

La fenêtre _Subsurface_ est généralement divisée en 4 panneaux avec un *Menu
principal* (Fichier Importer Journal Vue Aide) en haut de la fenêtre (pour
Windows et Linux) ou en haut de l'écran (pour Mac et Ubuntu Unity). Les
quatre panneaux sont :

La *liste des plongées* en bas à gauche, affichant toutes les plongées du
journal (carnet) de plongées de l'utilisateur. Une plongée peut être
sélectionnée et mise en surbrillance dans la liste en cliquant dessus. Dans
la plupart des cas, les touches haut/bas peuvent être utilisée pour passer
d'une plongée à l'autre. La *liste des plongées* est un outil important pour
manipuler un journal (carnet) de plongée.

La *carte de plongée* en bas à droite, affiche les sites de plongées de
l'utilisateur, sur une carte mondiale et centrée sur le site de la dernière
plongée sélectionnée dans la *liste des plongées*. L'échelle de la carte
peut être augmentée ou réduite.

Les *informations* en haut à gauche, fournissent des informations détaillées
sur la plongée sélectionnée dans la *liste des plongées*, dont des
statistiques pour la plongée sélectionnée ou pour toutes les plongées mises
en surbrillance.

Le *profil de plongée* en haut à droite, affiche un profil de plongée
graphique de la plongée sélectionnée dans la *liste des plongées*. Vous
pouvez zoomer sur le profil de plongée pour une vue plus détaillée.

Les séparateurs entre ces panneaux peuvent être déplacés pour modifier la
taille de chaque panneau. _Subsurface_ mémorise la position de ces
séparateurs, pour qu'au prochain lancement _Subsurface_ utilise ces
positions.

Si une unique plongée est sélectionnée dans la *liste des plongées*,
l'emplacement de la plongée, les informations détaillées et le profil de la
_plongée sélectionnée_ sont affichées dans les panneaux respectifs. Si
plusieurs plongées sont sélectionnées, la dernière mise en surbrillance est
la _plongée sélectionnée_, mais les données de _toutes les plongées mises en
surbrillances_ sont affichées dans l'onglet *Stats* du panneau
*informations* (profondeur maximale, minimale et moyenne, les durées, les
températures de l'eau et le SAC (air consommé); temps total et nombre de
plongées sélectionnées).

[[S_ViewPanels]]

image::images/main_window_f22.jpg["The Main Window", align="center"]

L'utilisateur décide quels panneaux sont affichés, parmi les 4, en
sélectionnant l'option *Vue* dans le menu principal. Cette fonctionnalité
permet plusieurs choix d'affichage :

*Tout* : affiche les quatre panneaux tels que sur la capture d'écran ci-dessus.

*Liste des plongées* : affiche uniquement la liste des plongées.

*Profil* : affiche uniquement le profile de plongée de la plongée sélectionnée.

*Info* : affiche uniquement les notes de plongées de la dernière plongée sélectionnée et les statistiques pour
toutes les plongées mises en surbrillance.

*Globe* : affiche uniquement la carte mondiale, centrée sur la dernière plongée sélectionnée.

Comme d'autres fonctions qui peuvent être accédée via le menu principal, ces
options peuvent aussi être utilisées par des raccourcis clavier. Les
raccourcis pour un système particulier sont affichés avec un souligné des
les entrées de menu. À cause des différents systèmes d'exploitation et des
divers langues, _Subsurface_ peut utiliser différentes touches de raccourcis
et ne sont donc pas détaillées ici.

Lorsque le programme est lancé pour la première fois, il n'affiche aucune
information, parce qu'il n'a aucune information de plongée disponible. Dans
les sections suivantes, le procédure pour créer a nouveau carnet de plongée
sera détaillée.

[[S_NewLogbook]]
Créer un nouveau carnet de plongée
----------------------------------
Sélectionner _Fichier -> Nouveau carnet de plongée_ à partir du menu
principal. Toutes les données de plongées sont effacées pour que de
nouvelles puissent être ajoutées. S'il existe des données non encore
enregistrées dans le carnet ouvert, l'utilisateur devra sélectionner s'il
faut les enregistrer ou non avant de créer le nouveau carnet.

[[S_GetInformation]]
== Enregistrement des informations de plongée dans le carnet
Maintenant qu'un nouveau carnet de plongée a été créé, il est simple de lui
ajouter des données. _Subsurface_ comporte plusieurs façons pour ajouter des
données de plongée au carnet.

1) Si l'utilisateur possède un carnet manuscrit, un tableur ou une autre forme
   de
 carnet maintenu manuellement, les données de plongée peuvent être ajoutées
 au carnet en utilisant une des approches suivantes :

 - Entrer les informations de plongée à la main. Cela est utile si le plongeur
   n'a pas
 utilisé d'ordinateur de plongée et que les plongées sont inscrites dans un
 carnet manuscrit. Voir  xref:S_EnterData[Entrer les informations de plongée
 à la main]

 - Importer les informations de plongée qui ont été maintenues soit dans un
   tableur
 soit dans un fichier CSV. Se reporter à : xref:S_Appendix_D[ANNEXE D :
 Exporter un tableur vers le format CSV] et à
 xref:S_ImportingCSVDives[Importer des plongées au format CSV].

Si une plongée est enregistrée par un ordinateur de plongée, le profil de
profondeur et de nombreuses informations supplémentaires peuvent être
obtenues. Ces plongées peuvent être importées à partir de :

 - L'ordinateur de plongée lui-même. Voir : xref:S_ImportDiveComputer[Importer
   de nouvelles informations de plongée à partir de l'ordinateur de plongée];
 - Logiciels propriétaires fournis par les fabricants d'ordinateurs de
   plongée. Voir
 xref:S_ImportingAlienDiveLogs[Importer les informations à partir d'autres
 sources de données numériques ou d'autres formats de données].
 - Tableur ou de fichiers CSV contenant les profils de plongées.
 Voir : xref:S_ImportingCSVDives[Importer les plongées au format CSV à partir
 des ordinateurs de plongées ou d'autres logiciels de carnet de plongée]


[[S_EnterData]]
=== Entrer les informations de plongée à la main

This is usually the approach for dives without a dive computer. The basic
record of information within _Subsurface_ is a dive. The most important
information in a simple dive logbook usually includes dive type, date, time,
duration, depth, the names of your dive buddy and the dive master or dive
guide, and some remarks about the dive. _Subsurface_ can store much more
information for each dive.  To add a dive to a dive log, select _Log -> Add
Dive_ from the Main Menu. The program then shows three panels on which to
enter information for a dive: two tabs in the *Info* panel (*Notes* and
*Equipment*), as well as the *Dive Profile* panel that displays a graphical
profile of each dive. These panels are respectively marked [red]#A#,
[red]#B# and [red]#C# in the figure below. Each of these tabs will now be
explained for data entry.

image::images/AddDive1_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Add dive", align="center"]
When you edit a field in Notes or Equipment panels, _Subsurface_ enters
*Editing Mode*, indicated by the message in the blue box at the top of the
*Notes* panel (see the image below). This message is displayed in all the
panels under Notes and Equipment when in *Editing Mode*.

image::images/BlueEditBar_f22.jpg["Blue edit bar", align="center"]

The _Apply changes_ button should only be selected after all the parts of a
dive have been entered.  When entering dives by hand, the _Info_,
_Equipment_ and _Profile_ tabs should be completed before applying the
information. By selecting the _Apply changes_ button, a local copy of the
information for this specific dive is saved in memory but NOT written to
disk.  The _Apply changes_ button should ONLY be selected after all parts of
a dive have been entered. When closing Subsurface, the program will ask
again, this time whether the complete dive log should be saved on disk or
not.

[[S_CreateProfile]]
==== Creating a Dive Profile

The *Dive Profile* (a graphical representation of the depth of the dive as a
function of time) is shown in the panel on the top right hand of the
_Subsurface_ window. When a dive is manually added to a logbook,
_Subsurface_ presents a default dive profile that needs to be modified to
best represent the dive described:

image::images/DiveProfile1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Initial dive profile", align="center"]

_Modifying the dive profile_: When the cursor is moved around the dive
profile, its position is shown by two right-angled red lines as seen below.
The time and depth represented by the cursor are indicated at the top of the
black information box (@ and D). The units (metric/imperial) on the axes are
determined by the *Preference* settings. The dive profile itself comprises
several line segments demarcated by waypoints (white dots on the profile, as
shown above). The default dive depth is 15 m.  If the dive depth was 20 m
then you need to drag the appropriate waypoints downward to 20 m. To add a
waypoint, double-click on any line segment. To move an additional waypoint,
drag it.  To remove a waypoint, right-click on it and choose "Remove this
point" from the context menu. Drag the waypoints to represent an accurate
time duration for the dive. Below is a dive profile for a dive to 20 m for
30 min, followed by a 5 minute safety stop at 5 m.

image::images/DiveProfile2_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Edited dive profile", align="center"]

_Specifying the gas composition:_ The gas composition used is indicated
along the line segments of the dive profile. This defaults to the first gas
mixture specified in the *Equipment* tab, which was air in the case of the
profile above. The gas mixtures of segments of the dive profile can be
changed by right-clicking on the particular waypoint and selecting the
appropriate gas from the context menu. Changing the gas for a waypoint
affects the gas shown in the segment _to the left_ of that waypoint. Note
that only the gases defined in the *Equipment* tab appear in the context
menu (see image below).

image::images/DiveProfile3_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Gas composition context menu", align="center"]

With the profile now defined, more details must be added to have a fuller
record of the dive. To do this, the *Notes* and the *Equipment* tabs on the
top left hand of the _Subsurface_ window should be used. Click on
xref:S_Notes_dc[*this link*] for instructions on how to use these tabs.
[[S_ImportDiveComputer]]
=== Importer de nouvelles informations de plongée à partir de l'ordinateur de plongée

==== Connecting and importing data from a dive computer.

The use of dive computers allows the collection of a large amount of
information about each dive, e.g. a detailed record of depth, duration,
rates of ascent/descent and of gas partial pressures. _Subsurface_ can
capture this information, using dive details from a wide range of dive
computers. The latest list of supported dive computers can be found at:
link:http://subsurface-divelog.org/documentation/supported-dive-computers/[
Supported dive computers].

[icon="images/icons/warning2.png"]
[WARNING]
Several dive computers consume more power when they are in PC-Communication
mode. **This could drain the dive computer's battery**. We recommend the
user checks to be sure the dive computer is charged when connected to the
USB port of a PC. For example, several Suunto and Mares dive computers do
not recharge through the USB connection. Users should refer to the dive
computer's manual if they are unsure whether the dive computer recharges its
batteries while connected to the USB port.

To import dive information from a dive computer to a computer with
_Subsurface_, the two pieces of equipment must communicate with one
another.  This involves setting up the communications port (or mount point)
of the computer with _Subsurface_ that communicates with the dive
computer. To set up this communication, users need to find the appropriate
information to instruct _Subsurface_ where and how to import the dive
information.
xref:_appendix_a_operating_system_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information_from_a_dive_computer[Appendix
A] provides the technical information to help the user achieve this for
different operating systems and
xref:_appendix_b_dive_computer_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information[Appendix
B] has dive computer specific information.

After this, the dive computer can be hooked up to the user's PC using these
steps:

1. The interface cable should be connected to a free USB port (or the Infra-red
	or Bluetooth connection set up as described later in this manual)

2. The dive computer should be placed into PC Communication mode.
	(Se reporter au manuel de l'ordinateur de plongée)

3. In _Subsurface_, from the Main Menu, select _Import -> Import From Dive
   Computer_.  Dialogue *A* in the figure below appears:


image::images/DC_import_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Download dialogue 1", align="center"]

Dive computers tend to keep a certain number of dives in memory, even though
these dives have already been imported to _Subsurface_. For that reason, if
the dive computer allows this, _Subsurface_ only imports dives that have not
been uploaded before. This makes the download process faster on most dive
computers and also saves battery power of the dive computer (at least for
those not charging while connected via USB).

 - The dialogue has two drop-down lists, *Vendor* and *Dive Computer*. On the
   *vendor* drop-down list select the make of the computer, e.g.  Suunto,
   Oceanic, Uwatec, Mares. On the *Dive Computer* drop-down list, the model
   name of the dive computer must be selected, e.g. D4 (Suunto), Veo200
   (Oceanic), or Puck (Mares).

 - The *Device or Mount Point* drop-down list contains the USB or Bluetooth
   port name that _Subsurface_ needs in order to communicate with the dive
   computer.  The appropriate port name must be selected. Consult
   xref:_appendix_a_operating_system_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information_from_a_dive_computer[Appendix
   A] and
   xref:_appendix_b_dive_computer_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information[Appendix
   B] for technical details on how to find the appropriate port information for
   a specific dive computer and, in some cases, how to do the correct settings
   to the operating system of the computer on which _Subsurface_ is running.

 - If all the dives on the dive computer need to be downloaded, check the
   checkbox _Force download of all dives_. Normally, _Subsurface_ only
   downloads dives after the date-time of the last dive in the *Dive List*
   panel. If one or more of your dives in _Subsurface_ has been accidentally
   deleted or if there are older dives that still need to be downloaded from
   the dive computer, this box needs to be checked. Some dive computers
   (e.g. Mares Puck) do not provide a contents list to _Subsurface_ before the
   download in order to select only new dives.  Consequently, for these dive
   computers, all dives are downloaded irrespective of the status of this check
   box.

 - If the checkbox _Always prefer downloaded dives_ has been checked and,
   during download, dives with identical date-times exist on the dive computer
   and on the _Subsurface_ *Dive List* panel, the dive in the _Subsurface_
   divelog will be overwritten by the dive record from the computer.

 - The checkbox marked _Download into new trip_ ensures that, after upload, the
   downloaded dives are grouped together as a new trip(s) in the *Dive List*.

 - Do *not* check the checkboxes labelled _Save libdivecomputer logfile_ and
   _Save libdivecomputer dumpfile_. These are only used as diagnostic tools
   when there are problems with downloads(see below).
 - Then select the _Download_ button.  With communication established, you can
   see how the data are retrieved from the dive computer.  Depending on the
   make of the dive computer and/or number of recorded dives, this could take
   some time. Be patient. The _Download_ dialogue shows a progress bar at the
   bottom of the dialogue. Remember for some dive computers progress
   information could be inaccurate since _Subsurface_ doesn’t know how much
   downloadable data there are until the download is complete.  After the dives
   have been downloaded, they appear in a tabular format on the right-hand side
   of the dialogue (see image *B*, above). Each dive comprises a row in the
   table, showing the date, duration and depth. Next to each dive is a
   checkbox: check all the dives that need to be transferred to the *Dive
   List*. In the case of the image above, the last six dives are checked and
   will be transferred to the *Dive List*. Then click the _OK_ button at the
   bottom of the dialogue. All the imported dives appear in the *Dive List*,
   sorted by date and time. Disconnect and switch off the dive computer to
   conserve its battery power.

 - If there is a problem in communicating with the dive computer, an error
   message is shown, similar to this text: "Unable to open /dev/ttyUSB0 Mares
   (Puck Pro)". Refer to the text in the box below.


****
*PROBLEMS WITH DATA DOWNLOAD FROM A DIVE COMPUTER?*
[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
Check the following:

 - Is the dive computer still in PC-communication or Upload mode?

 - Is the dive computer’s battery fully charged? If not then charge or replace
   it.

 - Is the connecting cable faulty? Does the cable work using other software?
   Has it worked before, or is this the first time the cable is being used? Are
   the contacts on the dive computer and the cable clean?

 - Consult
   xref:_appendix_a_operating_system_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information_from_a_dive_computer[Appendix
   A] to be sure the correct Mount Point was specified (see above).

 - On Unix-like operating systems, does the user have write permission to the
   USB port? If not, consult
   xref:_appendix_a_operating_system_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information_from_a_dive_computer[Appendix
   A]

If the _Subsurface_ computer does not recognize the USB adaptor by showing
an appropriate device name next to the Mount Point, then there is a
possibility the cable or USB adaptor is faulty. A faulty cable is the most
common cause of communication failure between a dive computer and
_Subsurface_.  It’s also possible _Subsurface_ cannot interpret the
data. Perform a download for diagnostic purposes with the following two
boxes checked in the download dialogue discussed above:

	Save libdivecomputer logfile
	Save libdivecomputer dumpfile

*Important*: These check boxes are only used when problems are encountered
during the download process. Under normal circumstances they should not be checked.
When checking these boxes, the user is prompted to select a folder where the information will be saved. The default folder is the one in which the
_Subsurface_
dive log is kept.

*Important:* _After downloading with the above checkboxes
checked, no dives are added to the
*Dive List* but two files are created in the folder selected above_:

	subsurface.log
	subsurface.bin

These files should be send to the _Subsurface_ mail list:
_subsurface@subsurface-divelog.org_ with a request for the files to be
analyzed. Provide the dive computer make and model as well as contextual
information about the dives recorded on the dive computer.
****

[[S_Bluetooth]]
==== Connecting _Subsurface_ to a Bluetooth-enabled dive computer
[icon="images/icons/bluetooth.jpg"]

Bluetooth is becoming a more common way of communication between dive
computers and _Subsurface_, for or instance, the Shearwater Petrel Mk2 and
the OSTC Mk3. _Subsurface_ provides a largely operating system independent
Bluetooth interface. Setting up _Subsurface_ for Bluetooth communication
requires four steps:

- Ensure Bluetooth is activated on the host computer running _Subsurface_.
- Ensure _Subsurface_ sees the Bluetooth adapter on the host computer.
- Ensure the Bluetooth-enabled dive computer is Bluetooth-discoverable and in
  PC upload mode.
- Ensure _Subsurface_ is paired with the Bluetooth-enabled dive computer.

Select the Download dialogue by selecting _Import -> Import from dive
computer_ from the *Main Menu*. After checking the box labelled _"Choose
Bluetooth download mode"_, the dialogue below appears.

===== Sur Linux ou MacOS :

image::images/DC_import_Bluetooth.jpg["FIGURE: Download Bluetooth", align="center"]

On the _Linux_ or _MacOS_ platforms the name of the _Subsurface_ computer
and its Bluetooth address are shown on the right hand side, On the left hand
side, if the computer has connected more than one local Bluetooth devices
you can use the list box to indicate which one needs to connect to
_Subsurface_.  The power state (on/off) of the Bluetooth adapter is shown
below the address and can be changed by checking the _Turn on/off_ box.  If
the Bluetooth address is not shown, then _Subsurface_ does not see the local
Bluetooth device. Ensure the Bluetooth driver is installed correctly on the
_Subsurface_ computer and check if it can be used by other Bluetooth
utilities like _bluetoothctl_ or _bluemoon_. This completes the first two
steps above.  Ensure the Bluetooth-enabled dive computer is in PC-upload
mode and it is discoverable by other Bluetooth devices. Consult the manual
of the dive computer for more information. Now the third item in the list
above has been finished.  Select the _Scan_ button towards the bottom left
of the dialogue above. After searching, the dive computer should be listed
(perhaps as one of a number of Bluetooth devices) in the main list box on
the lefthand side of the dialogue (see image above). If this does not work,
select the _Clear_ button, then scan again for Bluetooth devices using the
_Scan_ button. After taking these actions _Subsurface_ should see the dive
computer.  The label of the discovered dive computer contains the name of
the device, its address and its pairing status. If the device is not paired
and has a red background color, a context menu can be opened by selecting
the item with a right-click.  Select the the _Pair_ option and wait for the
task to complete. If this dive computer is being paired to Subsurface for
the first time, it’s possible Subsurface will request a Pass Code or PIN
number. The most commonly-used Pass Code is 0000, and this works for the
Shearwater Petrel. If necessary, consult the user manual of the dive
computer being used.

****
[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
Currently _Subsurface_ does not support Bluetooth pairing with dive
computers that require a custom PIN code. In order to pair the devices, use
other OS utilities as suggested below.

One way to achieve this is to use +bluetoothctl+:

	$ bluetoothctl
	[bluetooth]# agent KeyboardOnly
	Agent registered
	[bluetooth]# default-agent
	Default agent request successful
	[bluetooth]# pair 00:80:25:49:6C:E3
	Attempting to pair with 00:80:25:49:6C:E3
	[CHG] Device 00:80:25:49:6C:E3 Connected: yes
	Request PIN code
	[agent] Enter PIN code: 0000
****

After the devices are paired, press the _Save_ button of the dialogue.  This
closes the Bluetooth dialogue. Now select _Download_ in the _Download from
dive computer_ dialogue which should still be open. The downloaded dives are
shown on the righthand side of the download dialogue.

===== Sur Windows :
image::images/DC_import_Bluetooth_Windows.png["FIGURE: Download Bluetooth on Windows", align="center"]

On _Windows_ platforms the _Local Bluetooth device details section_ on the
right is not displayed as is the case on the Linux/Mac systems.  To start a
scan (by pressing the _Scan_ button)  check that the Bluetooth device on the
_Subsurface_ computer is turned on by selecting the dive computer from the
list of available Bluetooth devices (see image above). If the dive computer
is being accessed by Subsurface for the first time, it’s possible Subsurface
will request a Pass Code or PIN number. Supply the Pass Code recommended in
the user manual of the dive computer.  A Pass Code or PIN of 0000 is often
the default.

The pairing step is checked and done automatically during the download
process. If the devices have never been paired the system will ask
permission and put a message on the right side of the screen: _Add a device,
Tap to set up your DC device_. Always allow this pairing. After a discovered
item is selected, select the _Save_ button.  Finally select the _Download_
button on the _Download_ dialogue and wait for the process to complete.

[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
Currently _Subsurface_ works only with local Bluetooth adapters which use
Microsoft Bluetooth Stack. If the local device uses _Widcomm_, _Stonestreet
One Bluetopia Bluetooth_ or _BlueSoleil_ drivers it will not work. However,
Bluetooth hardware/dongles from these manufacturers (e.g. iSonic) that
support the Microsoft Bluetooth Stack do work.

A log message on the bottom left of the _Remote Bluetooth device selection_
shows details about the current status of the Bluetooth agent. To select
another dive computer for download using the "Remote Bluetooth selection
dialogue" press the three-dots button from the _"Choose Bluetooth download
mode"_ option.

[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]

*IN CASE OF PROBLEMS*:  If the Bluetooth adapter from the _Subsurface_ computer
gets stuck and the _Download_ process fails repeatedly,
 _unpair_ the devices and then repeat the above steps. If this is not successful,
 xref:S_HowFindBluetoothDeviceName[_Appendix A_] contains
information for manually setting up and inspecting the Bluetooth connection
with _Subsurface_.


[[S_DeviceNames]]
==== Changing the name of a dive computer

It may be necessary to distinguish between different dive computers used to
upload dive logs to _Subsurface_. For instance if a buddy’s dive computer is
the same make and model as your own and dive logs are uploaded from both
dive computers to the same _Subsurface_ computer, then you might like to
call one "Alice's Suunto D4" and the other "Bob's Suunto D4". Alternatively,
consider a technical diver who dives with two or more dive computers of the
same model, the logs of both (or all) being uploaded.  In this case it might
be prudent to call one of them "Suunto D4 (1)" and another "Suunto D4
(2)". This is easily done in _Subsurface_.  On the *Main Menu*, select _Log
-> Edit device names_. A dialog box opens, showing the current Model, ID and
Nickname of the dive computers used for upload. Edit the Nickname field for
the appropriate dive computer. After saving the Nickname, the dive logs show
the nickname for that particular device instead of the model name, allowing
easy identification of devices.

[[S_EditDiveInfo]]
==== Updating the dive information imported from the dive computer.

With the uploaded dives in the *Dive List*, the information from the dive
computer is not complete and more details must be added to have a full
record of the dives. To do this, the *Notes* and the *Equipment* tabs on the
top left hand of the _Subsurface_ window should be used.

[[S_Notes_dc]]
===== Notes

To have a more complete dive record, the user needs to add additional
information by hand. The procedure below is virtually identical for
hand-entered dives and for dives downloaded from a dive computer.

In some cases, you must provide the date and time of the dive, for example
when entering a dive by hand or when a dive computer doesn’t provide the
date and time of the dive.  (Usually the date and time of the dive, gas
mixture and water temperature are shown as obtained from the dive computer)
If the contents of the *Notes tab* is changed or edited in any way, the
message in a blue box at the top of the panel shows the dive is being
edited. If you click on the *Notes* tab, the following fields are visible
(left hand image, below):

image::images/AddDive3_f22.jpg["FIGURE: The Notes tab", align="center"]

The right hand image, above, shows a *Notes tab* filled with dive
information.  The *Time* field reflects the date and time of the dive. By
clicking the date, a calendar is displayed for selecting the correct
date. Press ESC to close the calendar.  The time values (hour and minutes)
can also be edited directly by clicking on each of them in the text box and
by over-typing the information displayed.

*Air/water temperatures*: Air and water temperatures during the dive are shown
in text boxes to the right of the Start time. Many dive computers supply water
temperature information and this box may have information.
If air temperature isn’t provided by the dive computer, the first temperature reading
might be used for the air temperature. Generally this is close to the real air temperature.
If editing is required, only a value is required, the units of temperature will be
automatically supplied by
_Subsurface_ (following the _Preferences_, metric or imperial units will
be used).

[[S_locations]]
*Location*:
[icon="images/icons/warning2.png"]
[WARNING]
Dive locations are managed as a *separate* part of the dive log.  The dive
information in the *Notes* and *Equipment* tabs can therefore NOT be edited
at the same time as the dive site information. Save all the other dive
information (e.g.  divemaster, buddy, protective gear, notes about the dive)
by selecting _Apply changes_ on the *Notes* tab BEFORE editing the dive site
information. Then supply a dive site name in the textbox labelled _Location_
on the *Notes* tab.

Type in the name of the dive site, e.g. "Tihany, Lake Balaton, Hungary".  If
several dives are made at the same location, the site information for the
first dive is re-used.  Existing dive locations can be edited by selecting
(on the *Dive List* panel) a dive done at that site and by opening the
location information. Click the globe button on the right of the location
name (see image on the right, above). When entering a dive location name,
auto location of dive site names makes it easy to select an existing dive
site name.  When typing the name of a dive site, a dropdown list appears
showing all sites with similar names. If the dive site has been used before,
click on the already-existing name.  The dive site names in the dropdown
list contain either a globe symbol (indicating existing dive sites in the
_Subsurface_ database)  or a *+* symbol (indicating dive site names that
appear consistent with the current dive site name but which haven’t been
added to the dive site database).  If the present dive site has not been
used before, a message appears as follows (image *A* below):

image::images/Locations1_f22.jpg["FIGURE:Location description panel", align="center"]

Doubleclick on the new dive site name. A panel appears to enter the
coordinates and other information about the site (image *B*, above). The
most important items are the coordinates of the site. There are three ways
to specify coordinates:

a. Use the world map in the bottom right hand part of the _Subsurface_
   window. The map displays an orange bar indicating "No location data - Move
   the map and double-click to set the dive location". Doubleclick at the
   appropriate place, and the orange bar disappears and the coordinates are
   stored.

b. Use eiher the Subsurface-Mobile App or the _Subsurface_ Companion App on an
   Android or iPhone device with GPS and if the dive site coordinates were
   stored using one of these apps.  xref:S_Companion[Click here for more
   information]
c. Enter coordiantes by hand if they are known, using one of four formats with
   latitude followed by longitude:

	ISO 6709 Annex D format e.g. 30°13'28.9"N 30°49'1.5"E Degrees and decimal
	minutes, e.g. N30° 13.49760' , E30° 49.30788' Degrees minutes seconds,
	e.g. N30° 13' 29.8" , E30° 49' 1.5" Decimal degrees, e.g. 30.22496 ,
	30.821798

Southern hemisphere latitudes are given with a *S*, e.g. S30°, or with a
negative value, e.g. -30.22496. Similarly western longitudes are given with
a *W*, e.g. W07°, or with a negative value, e.g. -7.34323. Some keyboards
don't have the degree sign (°). It can be replaced by a *d* like this: N30d
W20d.  If both a dive site name and coordinates have been provided, save the
dive site information by selecting the button _Apply changes_ at the top of
the panel.

*Important*: GPS coordinates of a dive site are linked to the location
name - so *saving* a dive site with only coordinates and no name
causes problems. (Subsurface will think all of these
dives have the same location and try to keep their GPS coordinates the
same).

*Dive site name lookup:* If you typed coordinates into the appropriate
text box, you can do an automated name lookup based on the coordinates.
This is done when _Subsurface_ uses the Internet to find the name of the dive site
based on the coordinates that were typed. If a name has been found, it is
automatically inserted into the tags box. The list box
(Titled _Dive sites on same coordinates_") at the bottom
of the dive site panel contains the names of other dives sites used at the
current location. For instance if the dive site is "Blue Hole" and there are several
sites named "Blue Hole", all of them are listed.

Enter any other contextual information about the dive site (Description and
Notes), then select _Apply Changes_ to save the geolocation for this dive
site.  The dive site information can later be edited by clicking the globe
icon to the right of the dive site name in the *Notes tab*.

*Dive mode*: This is a dropdown box allowing you to choose the type of dive
performed. The options are OC (Open Circuit SCUBA, the default setting, for most recreational dives),
Freedive (dive without SCUBA equipment), CCR (Closed-circuit
rebreather) and pSCR (Passive semi-closed rebreather).

*Divemaster*: The name of the divemaster or dive guide should be
entered in this field
which offers auto selection based on the list of dive masters in
the current logbook.

*Buddy*: In this field, enter the name(s) of the buddy or buddies
(separated with commas) who were on the
dive. Auto selection based on the list of buddies in the current logbook is
offered.

*Suit*: Here the type of dive suit used can be entered.
Auto selection of the suit description is available.
Some dry-suit users may choose to use this field to record what combination of
suit and thermal under suit was used.

*Rating*: Provide a subjective overall rating of the dive on a
5-point scale by clicking the appropriate star on the rating scale.

*Visibility*: Provide a rating of visibility during the
dive on a 5-point scale by clicking the appropriate star.

*Tags*: Tags that describe the type of dive done can be entered
here (separated by commas). Examples of common tags are boat, drift, training,
cave, etc.
_Subsurface_ has many built-in tags. By starting to type a tag, _Subsurface_ lists
the tags that correspond to the typing. For instance, by typing
+cav+, the tags *cave* and *cavern* are shown to choose from.

*Notes*: Any additional information for the dive can be entered here.

The _Apply changes_ and _Discard changes_ buttons are used to save all the
information for tabs in the *Info* panel and in the *Dive Profile*
panel. Use them when *ALL* other information has been added. The image
xref:S_Notes_dc[at the beginning of this section] shows an example of a
*Notes tab* after completing the dive information.

===== Equipment

The Equipment tab allow entering information about the type of cylinder and
gas used, as well as the weights used for the dive. The message in the blue
box at the top of the panel:

image::images/BlueEditBar_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Blue edit bar", align="center"]

shows the equipment is being edited. This is a highly interactive part of
_Subsurface_ and the information on cylinders and gases (entered here)
determines the behavior of the *Dive profile* (top right-hand panel).

[[cylinder_definitions]]
*Cylinders*: The cylinder information is entered through a dialogue that looks
like this:

image::images/DC_gas-dialogue1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Initial cylinder dialogue", align="center"]

For hand-entered dives, this information needs to be typed in. For dive
computers, _Subsurface_ often gets the gas used from the dive computer and
automatically inserts the gas composition(% oxygen or % helium) in the
table. The + button at the top right allows adding more cylinders for this
dive. The dark dustbin icon on the left allows you to delete information for
a cylinder.  Note that it is not possible to delete a cylinder if it is used
during the dive. A cylinder might be implicitly used in the dive, even
without a gas change event.  Start by selecting a cylinder type on the
left-hand side of the table.  To select a cylinder, the _Type_ box should be
clicked. This brings up a list button that can be used to display a dropdown
list of cylinders:

image::images/DC_gas-dialogue2_f20.jpg["FIGURE: The cylinder drop-down list button", align="center"]

The drop-down list can then be used to select the cylinder type that was
used for this dive, or just start typing in the box which shows the
available options for the entered characters. The *Size* of the cylinder as
well as its working pressure (_Work.press_) will automatically be shown in
the dialogue.

Next, indicate the starting pressure and the ending pressure of the
specified gas during the dive. The unit of pressure (metric/imperial)
corresponds to the settings chosen in the _Preferences_.

Finally, provide the gas mixture used. If air was used, the value of 21% can
be entered into the oxygen box or this field can be left blank. If nitrox or
trimix were used, their percentages of oxygen and/or helium should be
entered.  Any inappropriate fields should be left empty. After typing the
information for the cylinder, save the data either by pressing _ENTER_ on
the keyboard or by clicking outside the cell containing the
cursor. Information for any additional cylinders can be added by using the +
button at the top right hand. Here is an example of a complete description
for a dive using two cylinders (air and EAN50):

image::images/CylinderDataEntry3_f20.jpg["FIGURE: a completed cylinder dive information table", align="center"]

*Weights*: Information about the weight system used can be entered
using a dialogue similar to that of the cylinder information. If you click
the + button on the top right of the weights dialogue, the table looks like
this:

image::images/WeightsDataEntry1_f20.jpg["FIGURE:The Weights dialogue", align="center"]

By clicking on the _Type_ field, a drop-down list becomes accessible through
a down-arrow:

image::images/WeightsDataEntry2_f20.jpg["FIGURE:Weights type drop-down list button", align="center"]
This can be used to select the type of weight system used during the
dive. You may start typing in the box to specify a different weighting
mechanism that will be saved by _Subsurface_.  In the *Weight* field, type
in the amount of weight used during the dive. After specifying the weight
system, save the data by pressing _ENTER_ on the keyboard or by clicking
outside the cell with the cursor.  It’s possible to enter information for
more than one weight system by adding an additional system using the +
button on the top right hand. Weight systems can be deleted using the dust
bin icon on the left hand. Here is an example of information for a dive with
two types of weights: integrated as well as a weight belt:

image::images/WeightsDataEntry3_f20.jpg["FIGURE: A completed weights information table", align="center"]

==== Editing several selected dives simultaneously

_METHOD 1_: After uploading dives from a dive computer, the dive profiles of
each is shown in the *Dive profile* tab, as well as a few items of
information in the *Notes* tab (e.g. water temperature) and in the
*Equipment* tab (e.g. gas pressures and gas composition). Other fields
remain empty.  It may be useful to simultaneously edit some of the fields in
the *Notes* and *Equipment* tabs.  For instance, it’s possible that a diver
performed several dives during a single day, using identical equipment at
the same dive site, or with the same divemaster and/or buddy or
tags. Instead of completing the information for each dive separately, select
all the dives for that day in the *Dive List* and insert the same
information in the *Notes* and *Equipment* fields that need identical
information. This is done by editing the dive notes or the equipment for any
one of the selected dives.

Simultaneous editing only works with fields that do not already contain
information.  This means if some fields have been edited for a particular
dive among the selected dives, these are not changed while editing the dives
simultaneously. Technically, the rule for editing several dives
simultaneously is: if the data field being edited contains _exactly the same
information_ for all the dives that have been selected, the new, edited
information is substituted for all the selected dives. Otherwise only the
edited dive is changed, even though several dives have been selected in the
*Dive List*. This speeds up the completion of the dive log after several
similar dives.

[[S_CopyComponents]]
_METHOD 2_:There is a different way of achieving the same goal. Select a
dive with all the appropriate information typed into the *Notes* and
*Equipment* tabs. Then, from the main menu, select _Log -> Copy dive
components_.  A box is presented with a selection of check boxes for most of
the fields in the *Notes* and *Equipment* tabs.  Select the fields to be
copied from the currently selected dive, then select _OK_. Now, in the *Dive
List*, select the dives into which this information is to be pasted. Then,
from the main menu, select _Log -> Paste dive components_.  All the selected
dives now contain the data initially selected in the original source dive
log.

==== Adding Bookmarks to a dive

Many divers wish to annotate dives with text that indicate particular
events, e.g. "Saw dolphins", or "Released surface buoy". This is easily
done:

 - Right-click at the appropriate point on the dive profile.  This brings up
   the dive profile context menu. Select _Add bookmark_. A red flag is placed
   on the dive profile at that point (see *A* below).

 - Right-click on the red flag. This brings up the context menu (see *B*
   below). Select _Edit name_.

 - A text box is shown. Type the explanatory text for the bookmark (see *C*
   below). Select _OK_.  This saves the text associated with the bookmark.

 - Hovering the mouse over the red bookmark, the appropriate text is shown at
   the bottom of the information box (see *D* below).

image::images/Bookmarks.jpg["FIGURE: Bookmark dialog", align="center"]


==== Saving the updated dive information

The information entered in the *Notes* tab and the *Equipment* tab can be
saved by using the two buttons on the top right hand of the *Notes* tab. If
the _Apply changes_ button is clicked, the dive data are saved in the memory
image of the dive. If the _Discard changes_ button is clicked, the newly
entered dive data are erased from the computer memory, although the dive
profile is retained. When the user exits _Subsurface_ there is a final
prompt to confirm the new data should now be saved permanently on the
computer disk.

=== Importer les informations à partir d'autres sources de données numériques ou d'autres formats de données

[[S_ImportingAlienDiveLogs]]

Many divers log their dives using the proprietary software provided by the
manufacturers of their dive computers.  _Subsurface_ can import dive logs
from a range of other dive log software. While import from some software is
supported natively, others require export of the the dive log to an
intermediate format that can then be imported into _Subsurface_.  Currently,
_Subsurface_ supports importing CSV log files from several sources.  Dive
log import from APD LogViewer, XP5, Sensus and Seabear files are
preconfigured, but because the import is flexible, users can configure their
own imports.  Manually kept log files (e.g. a spreadsheet) can also be
imported by configuring the CSV import.  _Subsurface_ can also import UDDF
and UDCF files used by some dive log software and some dive computers, like
the Heinrichs & Weikamp DR5. Finally, for some dive log software like Mares
Dive Organizer we currently recommend importing the logbook first into a web
service like _divelogs.de_ and then import from there with
_Subsurface_. Divelogs.de supports a few additional logbook formats that
_Subsurface_ currently cannot handle.

If the format of other software is supported natively on Subsurface, select
either _Import -> Import log files_ or _File -> Open log file_. _Subsurface_
supports the data formats of many dive computers, including Suunto,
Shearwater and some CCR equipment. When importing dives, _Subsurface_ tries
to detect multiple records for the same dive and merges the information as
best as it can. If there are no time zone issues (or other reasons that
would cause the beginning time of the dives to be significantly different)
_Subsurface_ will not create duplicate entries. Below is more specific
information to import data to _Subsurface_.

==== Using the universal import dialogue
[[Unified_import]]

Importing dives from other software is done through a universal interface
activated by selecting _Import_ from the Main Menu, then clicking on _Import
Log Files_. This brings up dialogue *A*, below.

image::images/Import1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Import dialogue: step 1", align="center"]

Towards the bottom right is a dropdown selector with a default label of
_Dive Log Files_ which accesses different types of direct imports available,
as in dialogue *B*, above. Currently these are:

 - XML-formatted dive logs (DivingLog 5.0, MacDive and several other dive log
   systems)
 - Cochran dive logs
 - UDDF-formatted dive logs (e.g. Kenozoooid)
 - UDCF-formatted dive logs
 - Poseidon MkVI CCR logs
 - APD Inspiration/Evolution CCR logs
 - LiquiVision logs
 - divelogs.de logs
 - OSTC Tools logs
 - JDiveLog
 - Suunto Dive Manager (DM3, DM4, DM5)
 - CSV (text-based and spreadsheet-based) dive logs, including APD CCR logs

Selecting the appropriate format and then the specific log file in the large
window containing the file list on the right of the dialogue, opens the
imported dive log in the _Subsurface_ *Dive List*. Some other formats not
accessible through the Import dialogue are also supported, as explained
below.

==== Importing from  OSTCTools

_OSTC Tools_ is a Microsoft-based suite of dive download and dive management
tools for the OSTC family of dive computers. _OSTC Tools_ downloads dive
data from the dive computer and stores it as a binary file with file
extension _.dive_ . Subsurface can directly import these files when using
the universal import dialogue. From the dropdown list at the bottom right
select _OSTCTools Files (.dive .DIVE)_. This makes the _OSTC Tools_ dive
logs visible in the file list panel. Select one or more dive, then click the
_Open_ button. The OSTC dives are shown in the *Dive List* panel.

All H&W devices supported by OSTCTools can be imported to _Subsurface_. This
includes OSTC, OSTC Mk2, OSTC 2N/2C, OSTC3, OSTC Sport, and probably
although untested, Frog, OSTC2 and OSTC CR.

Please remember that OSTCTools is *not* true diving log software, but rather
a useful set of tools for analysis and management of OSTC devices. Only raw
dive computer data will be imported to _Subsurface_; the rest of the data
(buddies, equipment, notes, etc) need to be completed manually.


==== Importing from Mares Dive Organizer V2.1

Since Mares uses proprietary Windows software not compatible with
multi-platform applications, these dive logs cannot be directly imported
into _Subsurface_. Mares dive logs need to be imported using a three-step
process, using _www.divelogs.de_ as a gateway to extract the dive log
information.

1. Export the dive log data from Mares Dive Organizer to your desktop, using a
   _.sdf_ file name extension. Refer to xref:Mares_Export[Appendix C] for more
   information.
2. Data should then be imported into _www.divelogs.de_. First, create a user
   account in _www.divelogs.de_ and Log into that web site, then select _Import
   Logbook -> Dive Organizer from the menu on the left hand side.  The
   instructions must be carefully followed to transfer the dive information (in
   _.sdf_ format) from the Dive Organizer database to _www.divelogs.de_.
3. Finally, import the dives from _divelogs.de_ to _Subsurface_, using the
   instructions below.


[[S_ImportingDivelogsDe]]
==== Importing dives from *divelogs.de*

Importing dive information from _divelogs.de_ is simple, using a single
dialogue box. The _Import -> Import from Divelogs.de_ option should be
selected from the Main Menu. This brings up a dialogue box (see image *A*
below). Enter a user-ID and password for _divelogs.de_ and then select the
_Download_ button. Download from _divelogs.de_ starts immediately,
displaying a progress bar in the dialogue box. At the end of the download,
the success status is shown (see image *B*, below). The _Apply_ button
should then be selected, after which the imported dives appear in the
_Subsurface_ *Dive List* panel.

image::images/Divelogs1.jpg["FIGURE:Download from Divelogs.de", align="center"]

[[S_ImportingCSVData]]
==== Importer des données au format CSV

A comma-separated file (.csv) can be used to import dive information either
as dive profiles (as in the case of the APD Inspiration and Evolution closed
circuit rebreathers) or as dive metadata (in case the user keeps dive data
in a spreadsheet). The _CSV_ format is a universal simplified format that
allows easy information exchange between different computers or software
packages. For an introduction to CSV-formatted files see xref:S_CSV_Intro[A
Diver's Introduction To CSV Files]. _Subsurface_ dive logs can also be
exported in _CSV_ format to other software that reads this format. See
xref:S_Appendix_D[APPENDIX D: Exporting a spreadsheet to CSV format] for
information that may be helpful for importing spreadsheet-based data into
_Subsurface_.

[[S_ImportingCSVDives]]
===== Importer les plongées au format CSV à partir des ordinateurs de plongées ou d'autres logiciels de carnet de plongée

 _CSV_ files can be viewed using an ordinary text editor. A _CSV_ file is normally organized into
a single line that provides the headers (or _field names_ or _column headings_) of the data
columns, followed by the data, one record per line.

There are two types of _CSV_ dive logs that can be imported into
_Subsurface_:

1. _CSV dive details_: This dive log format contains similar information to
   that of a typical written dive log, e.g. dive date and time, dive depth,
   dive duration, names of buddy and divemaster and information about cylinder
   pressures before and after the dive, as well as comments about the dive. All
   the data for a single dive go on a single line of text, following the order
   of the column headings.

2. _CSV dive profile_: This dive log format includes much more information
   about a single dive. For instance there may be information at 30-second
   intervals, indicating depth, water temperature, and cylinder pressure at
   that moment in time. Each line contains the information for a single instant
   in time during the dive, 30 seconds after that of the previous instant. Many
   lines are required to complete the depth profile information for a single
   dive. This is a common export format used by closed-circuit rebreather (CCR)
   dive equipment and many software packages that handle dive computer data
   and/or dive logs.

Before being able to import the _CSV_ data to _Subsurface_ *you need to know
a few things about the data being imported*:

a. Which character separates the different columns within a single line of
   data? This field separator should be either a comma (,) a semicolon (;) or a
   TAB character.  This can be determined by opening the file with a text
   editor. If it is comma-delimited or semicolon-delimited, the comma or
   semicolon characters between the values are clearly visible. If these are
   not evident and the numbers are aligned in columns, the file is probably
   TAB-delimited (i.e. it uses a TAB as a field separator).

b. Which data columns need to be imported into _Subsurface_? Is it a _CSV dive
   details_ file or a _CSV dive profile_ file? Open the file using a text
   editor and note the titles of the columns to be imported and their column
   positions.

c. Is the numeric information (e.g. dive depth) in metric or in imperial units?

With this information, importing the data into _Subsurface_ is
straightforward. Select _Import -> Import Log Files_ from the main menu. In
the resulting file selection menu, select _CSV files_ (towards the bottom
right). This shows all .CSV files in the selected directory. Select the file
that needs to be imported. A configuration panel appears as depicted below:

image::images/csv_import1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: CSV download dialogue 1", align="center"]

At the top left, there is a dropdown list containing pre- configured
settings for common dive computers and software packages.
 If the _CSV_ file being imported originated from any of
these pre-configured items, select it. Otherwise use the _Manual Import_
option. The configuration panel also has dropdown lists for the specification of the appropriate
field separator (Tab, comma or semicolon), the date format used in the _CSV_ file,
the time units (seconds, minutes or minutes:seconds), as well as the unit system
(metric or imperial). Selecting the appropriate options among these is critical for
successful data import.

Complete this by ensuring that all the data columns have the appropriate
column headings. The top blue row of the data table contains the column
headings found in the _CSV_ data file. The blue row of balloons immediately
above these contains the names understood by _Subsurface_. These balloons
can be moved using a drag-and-drop action. For instance, _Subsurface_
expects the column heading for Dive number (" # ") to be "Dive # ". If the
column heading that _Subsurface_ expects is not in the blue row, drag the
appropriate balloon from the upper area and drop it in the appropriate blue
cell at the top of the table. For example, to indicate the correct column
for "Dive #", drag the ballooned item labelled "Dive # " and drop it in the
blue cell immediately above the white cell containing " # ", depicted in the
image below.

image::images/csv_import2_f20.jpg["FIGURE: CSV download dialogue 2", align="center"]

Continue in this way to ensure all the column headings in the blue row of
cells correspond to the headings listed in the top part of the dialogue.
When finished, select the _OK_ button on the bottom right of the dialogue.
The data from the _CSV_ file are imported and shown in the *Dive List*
panel.

[[S_CSV_Intro]]
****
*A Diver's Introduction to _CSV_ Files*
[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]

_CSV_ is an abbreviation for a data file format: _Comma-Separated
Values_. It is a file format that allows you to view or edit information
using a text editor like Notepad (Windows), gedit (Linux) or TextWrangler
(OS/X). There are two main advantages of the _CSV_ format.  First, the data
are easily editable as text without any proprietary software.  Second, all
information is human-readable, not obscured by any custom or proprietary
attributes that proprietary software inserts into files.  Because of its
simplicity the _CSV_ format is used as an interchange format between many
software packages, e.g. between spreadsheet, statistical, graphics, database
and diving software. Within _Subsurface_, _CSV_ files can also be used to
import information from other sources like spreadsheet-based dive logs and
some dive computers.

_CSV_ files can be created or edited with a normal text editor. The most
important attribute of a _CSV_ file is the _field separator_, the character
used to separate fields within a single line. The field separator is
frequently a comma, a colon, a SPACE character or a TAB character. When
exporting data from spreadsheet software, the field separator needs to be
specified in order to create the _CSV_ file. _CSV_ files are normally
organized into a single line that provides the headers (or _field names_) of
the data columns, followed by the data, one record per line. Note that each
field name may comprise more than one word separated by spaces; for instance
_Dive site_, below. Here is an example of dive information for four dives
using a comma as a field separator:

	Dive site,Dive date,Time,Dive_duration, Dive_depth,Dive buddy
	Illovo Beach,2012-11-23,10:45,46:15,18.4,John Smith
	Key Largo,2012-11-24,09:12,34:15,20.4,Jason McDonald
	Wismar Baltic,2012-12-01,10:13,35:27,15.4,Dieter Albrecht
	Pulau Weh,2012-12-20,09:46,55:56,38.6,Karaeng Bontonompo

The above data are not easily read by a human. Here is the same information
in TAB-delimited format:

	Dive site	Dive date	Time	Dive_duration	Dive_depth	Dive buddy
	Illovo Beach	2012-11-23	10:45	46:15	18.4	John Smith
	Key Largo	2012-11-24	09:12	34:15	20.4	Jason McDonald
	Wismar Baltic	2012-12-01	10:13	35:27	15.4	Dieter Albrecht
	Pulau Weh	2012-12-20	09:46	55:56	38.6	Karaeng Bontonompo

It is clear why many people prefer the TAB-delimited format to the
comma-delimited format. The disadvantage is that you cannot see the TAB
characters. For instance, the space between _Dive_ and _date_ in the top
line may be a SPACE character or a TAB character (in this case it is a SPACE
character: the tabs are before and after _Dive date_). If the field names in
the first line are long, the alignment with data in the other lines cannot
be maintained. Here is a highly simplified and shortened TAB-delimited
example of a _CSV_ dive log from an APD closed-circuit rebreather (CCR) dive
computer:

	Dive Time (s)	Depth (m)	pO₂ - Setpoint (Bar) 	pO₂ - C1 Cell 1 (Bar)	Ambient temp. (Celsius)
	0       0.0     0.70    0.81    13.1
	0       1.2     0.70    0.71    13.1
	0       0.0     0.70    0.71    13.1
	0       1.2     0.70    0.71    13.2
	0       1.2     0.70    0.71    13.1
	10      1.6     0.70    0.72    12.7
	20      1.6     0.70    0.71    12.6
	30      1.7     0.70    0.71    12.6
	40      1.8     0.70    0.68    12.5

When a _CSV_ file is selected for import, _Subsurface_ displays the column
headers as well as some of the data in the first few lines of the _CSV_
file, making it much easier to work with _CSV_ files.  _CSV_ files can be
used in many contexts for importing data into a _Subsurface_ dive log.
Knowing a few basic things about the content of the _CSV_ file helps with a
smooth import of the dives into _Subsurface_.

****


[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
But, the _CSV_ import has a couple of caveats. Avoid some special characters
like ampersand (&), less than (<), greater than (>) and double quotes (") as
part of the numbers or text within a cell. The file should use UTF-8
character set, if using non-ASCII characters. Also the size of the _CSV_
file might cause problems. Importing 100 dives at a time (_CSV dive
details_) works, but larger files might exceed the limits of the parser
used. When encountering problems with _CSV_ imports, first try with a
smaller file to make sure everything works.


=== Importing Dive coordinates from a mobile device with GPS.

A smartphone with built-in GPS facilities can be used to store the locations
of dives.  This is performed by:

Taking the mobile device along on the dive boat / liveabord while
automatically collecting dive site coordinate information.

2) Uploading the coordinates from the mobile device to the _Subsurface_
   Internet server.

Syncronising the dives in the _Subsurface_ dive list with the coordinates
stored on the _Subsurface_ Internet server.

_Subsurface has two tools for achieving this:

- The _Subsurface Companion App_ (Android and iOS).

- The _Subsurface-mobile_ app (Android and iOS)

Both of these applications perform the collection of dive site coordinates
and the synchronisation with dives in the _Subsurface_ dive list. However,
the Companion App is not being further developed and has largely been
replaced by the _Subsurface-mobile_ app. While the _Companion app_ serves
exclusively to collect dive site coordinates and to make these available to
the _Subsurface_ desktop version, _Subsurface-mobile_ performs many of the
functions of the desktop version, including the management and viewing of
dive information. Below, we describe how to perform the above three steps
using each of the two mobile apps.

For information on using the _Subsurface Companion App_, click
xref:S_iCompanion[_here_].

==== Storing and and using GPS locations using  _Subsurface-mobile_

===== Install _Subsurface-mobile_

Find _Subsurface-mobile_ on Google Play and install it on an Android
device. The app is free. The iOS version is currently
experimental. _Subsurface-mobile_ has an extensive
https://subsurface-divelog.org/documentation/subsurface-mobile-user-manual[user
manual] accessible from within that app.

===== Create a _Subsurface-mobile_ account

This topic is discussed at length in the _Subsurface-mobile_ user manual. In
the Credentials screen of _Subsurface-mobile_ provide an e-mail address and
a user password that enables subsequent access. A PIN number is e-mailed
from the _Subsurface_ Internet server to the e-mail address that has been
provided.  Type the PIN into the appropriate text field in the Credentials
screen (see image below).  The _Subsurface_ Internet server notifies the
user that a new user has been registered.

*N.B.:* To successfully create a user account, the mobile device must have Internet connectivity,
either through the cellular network or via wifi.

image::images/MobileCredentials.jpg["FIGURE: Subsurface-mobile, credentials screen", align="center"]


===== Configure auto-collecting of GPS coordinates

Activate the main menu of _Subsurface-mobile_ by selecting the "hamburger"
menu button at the bottom left of the _Subsurface-mobile_ screen (see image
above), then select _GPS_ -> _Preferences_ (see image below). The collection
of GPS locations is done in the background and automatically, using two
settings:

- _Time threshold._ (minutes). The app will try to get a location every X
  minutes

- _Distance threshold._ (meters). Minimum distance between two locations.

*How are GPS coordinates collected?* Assuming the diver sets 5 minutes and 50
meters in the settings above, the app will start by recording a location at the current
location, followed by another one at every 5 minutes *or* every time you move 50 m
from previous location, whichever happens first.
If subsequent locations are within a radius of 50 meters from the previous one,
a new location is not saved. If the diver is not moving, only one location is
saved, at least until the _Time-threshold_ period has elapsed.
If the diver moves, a trace of the route is obtained by saving a location every 50 meters.

===== Activate the automated recording of GPS locations

The _Subsurface-mobile_ main menu has a checkbox at the bottom left labled
_Run location service_ (see image below). Checking the box starts the
automated recording of GPS positions.

image::images/MobileMenu.jpg["FIGURE: Subsurface-mobile main menu", align="center"]

===== After the dive, stop the automated recording of GPS locations

Uncheck the check box at the bottom left of the _Subsurface-mobile_ main
menu.

===== Upload the GPS locations onto the _Subsurface_ Internet server.

*N.B.:* Uploading the GPS locations to the Internet can only take place if the mobile
device has reliable access to the Internet, either via a cellular network or
via a wifi connection. If the Internet is not accessible from the dive site(s),
then GPS uploading can only take place after the dive or after the dive trip,
when an Internet connection has been re-established.

From the _Subsurface-mobile_ main menu, select _GPS_ -> _Upload GPS
data_. The locations are uploaded. Check the indicator at the top of the
mobile screen for internet activity, indicating the transfer of information.

===== Apply the stored GPS locations to dives on the _Subsurface_ dive list.

_Subsurface_ collects the first GPS location recorded after the start of a
dive (obtained within _Subsurface_ from either the dive computer or from the
manually-entered dive information) and before the end of a dive. These
coordinates are shown in the _Coordinates_ field of the dive site panel for
each dive. Within the dive site panel, provide a name for the coordinates
that have been assigned to the dive, following the instructions under the
heading above xref:S_locations[_Location_ management].

The
https://subsurface-divelog.org/documentation/subsurface-mobile-user-manual[user
manual for _Subsurface-mobile_] (accessible from within that app)  contains
detailed instructions for performing the collection of GPS data and for
managing, uploading and synchronising this information.


[[S_iCompanion]]
==== Importing GPS coordinates with the _Subsurface Companion App_ for mobile phones

Using the *Subsurface Companion App* on an _Android device_   or
xref:S_iphone[_iPhone_] with GPS, the coordinates
for the diving
location can be automatically passed to the _Subsurface_ dive log. The Companion App
stores dive locations on a dedicated Internet server. _Subsurface_ can collect
the locations from the server.
To do this:

===== Create a Companion App account

- Register on the http://api.hohndel.org/login/[_Subsurface companion web
  page_].  A confirmation email with instructions and a personal *DIVERID*
  will be sent, a long number enabling access to the file server and Companion
  App capabilities.

- Download the app from
  https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.subsurface[Google Play
  Store] or from
  http://f-droid.org/repository/browse/?fdfilter=subsurface&fdid=org.subsurface[F-Droid].

===== Using the Subsurface companion app on an Android smartphone

On first use the app has three options:

* _Create a new account._ Equivalent to registering in the _Subsurface_
  companion page using an Internet browser. You can request a *DIVERID* using
  this option, but it’s supplied via email and followed up by interaction with
  the http://api.hohndel.org/login/[_Subsurface companion web page_] to
  activate the account.

* _Retrieve an account._ If you forget your *DIVERID* you will receive an
  email to recover the ID string.

* _Use an existing account._ You are prompted for your *DIVERID*. The app
  saves this *DIVERID* and doesn’t ask for it again unless you use the
  _Disconnect_ menu option (see below).

[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
In the _Subsurface_ main program, the *DIVERID* should also be entered on
the Default Preferences panel, by selecting _File -> Preferences ->
Defaults_ from the main menu in _Subsurface_ itself.  This helps
synchronization between _Subsurface_ and the Companion App.

*Créer de nouveaux emplacements de plongée*

Now you are ready to get a dive position and send it to the server. The
Android display looks like the left hand image (*A*) below, but without any
dives.

Touch the + icon at the top right to add a new dive site. A menu with 3
options shows:

* Current: A prompt for a place name is shown (or a request to activate the
  GPS if it is turned off), after which the current location is saved.

* Use Map: This option allows you to fix a position by searching a world
  map. A world map is shown (see *B* below). Specify the desired position with
  a _long press_ on the touch sensitive screen (if the marked location is
  wrong, simply choose a new location)  and select the check symbol in the
  upper right. A dialog is shown allowing you to enter the name of the dive
  location and the date and time of the dive (see *C* below). In order to
  import this dive location in _Subsurface_, set the time to agree with the
  time of that dive on the dive computer.

image::images/Companion_5.jpg["FIGURE: Companion App, add location using map", align="center"]


* Import local GPX file: The Android device searches for .gpx files and
  located archives will be shown. The selected .gpx file is opened and its
  locations shown. Now select the appropriate locations, then select the tab
  in the upper right, afterAndroid device.

*Dive lists of dive locations*

The main screen shows a list of dive locations, each with a name, date and
time (see *A* below). Some locations may have an arrow-up icon over the
selection box to the left showing they need to be uploaded to the
server. You can select individual dive locations from the list. A selected
location has a check mark in the selection box on the left. Group operations
(like _Delete_ or _Send_)  are performed on several selected locations.

Dive locations in this list can be viewed in two ways: a list of locations
or a map showing them. The display mode (List or Map) is changed by
selecting _Dives_ at the top left of the screen (see *A* below) and then
selecting the display mode. The display mode can be changed either from the
list of locations or from the map (see *B* below). Upon selecting a location
(on the list or on the map), an editing panel opens (see *C* below) where
the dive description or other details may be changed.

image::images/Companion_4.jpg["FIGURE: Companion App, add location using map", align="center"]


Upon selecting a dive (*not* selecting the check box), the name given to it,
date/time and GPS coordinates are shown with two options at the top of the
screen:

- Edit (pencil): Change the text name or other characteristics of the dive
  location.

Maps: Display a map showing the dive location.  After editing and saving a
dive location (see *C* above), upload it to the web service, as explained
below.

*Uploading dive locations*

There are several ways to send locations to the server.  The easiest is
simply selecting the locations (See *A* below) and then touching the right
arrow at the top right of the screen.

[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]
Be careful! The trash icon on the right means exactly what it should; it
deletes the selected dive location(s).

image::images/Companion_1.jpg["FIGURE: Screen shots (A-B) of companion app", align="center"]


After a dive trip using the Companion App, all dive locations are ready to
be downloaded to a _Subsurface_ dive log (see below).


*Settings on the Companion App*

Selecting the _Settings_ menu option results in the right hand image above
(*B*).

_Server and account_

- _Web-service URL._ This is predefined (http://api.hohndel.org/)

- _User ID._ The DIVERID obtained by registering as described above. The
  easiest way to get it is to copy and paste from the confirmation email or
  just type it in.

_Synchronisation_

- _Synchronize on startup_. If selected, dive locations in the Android device
  and those on the web service synchronize each time the app is started.

- _Upload new dives._ If selected, each time the user adds a dive location it
  is automatically sent to the server.

_Background service_

Instead of entering an unique dive location, you can leave the service
running in the background, allowing a continuous collection of GPS
locations.

The settings below define the behavior of the service:

- _Min duration._ In minutes. The app will try to get a location every X
  minutes until stopped by the user.

- _Min distance._ In meters. Minimum distance between two locations.

- _Name template._ The name the app will use when saving the locations.

[icon="images/icons/info.jpg"]
[TIP]
_How does the background service work?_ Assuming the diver sets 5 minutes
and 50 meters in the settings above, the app will start by recording a
location at the current location, followed by another one at every 5 minutes
*or* every time one moves 50 m from previous location.  If subsequent
locations are within a radius of 50 meters from the previous one, a new
location is not saved. If the diver is not moving, only one location is
saved.  If the diver is moving, a trace of the route is obtained by saving a
location every 50 meters.

_Other_

_Mailing List._ The mail box for _Subsurface_. Users can send an email to
the Subsurface mailing list.

- _Subsurface website._ A link to the URL of Subsurface web

- _Version._ Displays the current version of the Companion App.

_Search_

Search the saved dive locations by name or by date and time.

_Start service_

Starts the _background service_ following the previously defined settings.

_Disconnect_

This is admittedly a badly named option that disconnects the app from the
server.  It resets the user ID in the app, showing the first screen where an
account can be created, retrieve the ID for an existing account or use the
users own ID. The _Disconnect_ option is useful if the Android device was
used to download the dive locations of another registered diver.

_Send all locations_

This option sends all locations stored in the Android device to the server.

[[S_iphone]]
===== Using the Subsurface companion app on an _iPhone_ to record dive locations

The iPhone interface is quite simple. Type the user ID (obtained during
registration) into the space reserved for it, then select "Dive in" (see
left part of the image below) and start collecting dive location
information.

image::images/iphone.jpg["FIGURE: Using iPhone companion application", align="center", width=640]

Dives can be added automatically or manually. In manual mode, a dive
location or waypoint is added to the GPS input stream. In automatic mode, a
continuous path of GPS locations is created from which, after import,
Subsurface can select the appropriate GPS locations based on the times of
dives. The default mode for the _iphone_ is automatic. When adding a dive,
the location service is started automatically and a red bar appears at the
bottom of the screen. After the dive, click on the red bar to end the
location service. While the location service is running you can only add
dives manually.

You can edit the site name afterwards by selecting the dive from the dive
list and clicking on the site name. There are no other editable fields. The
dive list is automatically uploaded from the iPhone to the web
service. There is no option to trigger upload manually.


*Downloading dive locations to the _Subsurface_ divelog*

Download dive(s) from a dive computer or enter them manually into
_Subsurface_ before obtaining the GPS coordinates from the server. The
download dialog can be reached via _Ctrl+G_ or from the _Subsurface_ Main
Menu _Import -> Import GPS data from Subsurface Service_, resulting in the
image on the left (*A*), below. On first use the DIVERID text box is
blank. Provide a DIVERID, then select the _Download_ button to start the
download process, after which the screen on the right (*B*) below appears:

image::images/DownloadGPS.jpg["FIGURE: Downloading Companion app GPS data", align="center"]

Note that the _Apply_ button is now active: selecting it updates the
locations of the newly entered or uploaded dives in _Subsurface_, i.e. it
applies the coordinates and names entered on the app to all the new dives
that match the date-times of the uploaded GPS localities. The names of dive
locations entered within _Subsurface_ (i.e. before downloading the GPS
coordinates) have precedence over downloaded dive locations.

Since _Subsurface_ matches GPS locations from the mobile device and dive
information from the dive computer based on date-time data, automatic
assignment of GPS data to dives depends on agreeing date-time information
between the two devices. Although _Subsurface_ has a wide range tolerance,
it may not be able to identify the appropriate dive if there is a large
difference between the time in the dive computer and that of the Android
device.  This results in no updates.

Similar date-times may not always be possible and there may be many reasons
for this (e.g. time zones).  _Subsurface_ may also be unable to decide which
is the correct position for a dive (e.g. on repetitive dives while running
_background service_ there may be several locations that would be included
in the time range that fit not only the first dive, but one or more
subsequent dives as well).  A workaround to manually edit the date-time of a
dive in the _Subsurface_ Dive List *before* downloading the GPS data and
then to change the date-time back again *after* downloading GPS data.

[icon="images/icons/info.jpg"]
[NOTE]
TIPS:

- _Background service_ may fill the location list with unnecessary locations
  that don’t correspond to the exact dive point but do correspond to the
  boat's route.
   Right now, these locations are difficult to delete from the server. In some
   situations it
  is better to clean up the list on the mobile device before sending the dive
  points to the web server by simply deleting the inappropriate
  locations. This might be necessary, for instance, to keep the location list
  clear to see dives in the web service map display (see above).
- It may also be useful to give informative names to the locations sent to the
  web server, or at least to use an informative name in the _Name Template_
  setting while running the _background service_, especially on a dive trip
  with many dives and dive locations.

[[S_LoadImage]]
=== Adding photographs to dives

Many (if not most) divers take photographs during a dive. _Subsurface_
allows the storage and display of photographs for each dive. Photos are
superimposed on the dive profile at the times during the dive when they were
taken. They can also be viewed from the dive profile.

==== Loading photos and synchronizing between dive computer and camera

Left-lick on a dive or on a group of dives on the dive list, bringing up the
xref:S_DiveListContextMenu[Dive list context Menu]. Right-click the
appropriate option to import images either from file or from the
Internet. The system file browser appears. Select the folder and photographs
that need to be loaded into _Subsurface_ and click the _Open_ button.

image::images/LoadImage2_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Load images option", align="center"]

This brings up the time synchronization dialog, shown below. The time
synchronization is not perfect between the dive computer used during a dive,
and the camera used during that same dive. These two devices often differ by
several minutes. _Subsurface_ attempts to synchronize these two devices so
that the exact times of photographs can be used to position photographs on
the dive profile.

_Subsurface_ synchronizes camera with dive computer in three ways:

- *Pro-actively*: Before the dive, ensure synchronization of the dive computer time settings with
  the time settings of the camera by changing the date-time settings on one or both of these devices.
- *Manually*: Writing down the exact camera time at the start of a dive allows using the
  difference in time between the two devices. As long as the device
  settings for time has not been changed in either device, the times of
  both devices after the dive or even at the end of the day allows manually setting the time
  difference in the _Time shift_ dialog (see image below). Towards the top of the dialog is a time
  setting tool immediately under the heading _Shift times of image(s) by_, in the image below.
  If the camera time is 7 minutes later than that of the dive computer, set the time setting
  tool to a value of 00:07 and select the _Earlier_ radio button.
  This is appropriate, since the photos need to be shifted
  7 minutes earlier (camera is 7 minutes ahead of dive computer). Ignore any "AM" or "PM" suffix
  in that tool. Click the _OK_ button and synchronization is done.

image::images/LoadImage3b_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Synchronization dialog", align="center"]


- *By photograph*: There is a very slick way of achieving synchronization, requiring a
  photograph of the face of the dive computer showing the time. _Subsurface_ gets
  the exact time the photograph was taken, using the metadata the camera stores within
  each photo and compares this with the time visible on the photo. To do this, use the
  bottom half of the _Time shift_ dialog. In this case the top part of the dialog is ignored. Click on
  the horizontal bar called _Select image of dive computer showing time_. This brings up
  a file browser for selecting the photograph of the dive computer time. Select the
  photograph using the file browser and click on _OK_. This photograph of the dive computer
  appears in the bottom panel of the _Shift times_ dialog. Now _Subsurface_ knows exactly
  when the photograph was taken. Now set the date-time dialog to the left of the photo
  so it reflects the date and time of the dive computer in the photo. When the
  date-time tool has been set, _Subsurface_ knows exactly what the time difference between
  camera and dive computer is, and it can synchronize the devices. The image below shows
  a photograph of the face of the dive computer and with the date-time tool set to the
  date-time.

image::images/LoadImage3c_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Synchronization dialog", align="center"]

If the timestamp of a photograph is more than 30 minutes before or after the
dive, it is not placed on the dive profile (see the red warning in the image
above). However, If the appropriate checkbox is selected (see image above)
these images can still be placed on the _Photos_ tab of the *Notes* panel so
that all photos associated with a dive are visible, including photos taken
before or after the dive.

==== Viewing the photos

After the images have been loaded, they appear in two places:

 - the _Photos_ tab of the *Notes* panel (left part of image below).
 - as tiny icons (stubs) on the dive profile at the appropriate positions
   reflecting the time each photograph was taken.  To view the photos on the
   dive profile, activate the _show-photos_ button in the tool bar to the left
   of the dive profile:

image::images/icons/ShowPhotos_f20.png["FIGURE:Show photos toolbar button", align="left"]

This results in a profile display as in the image below:

image::images/LoadImage4_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Photos on dive profile", align="center"]

Hover the mouse over any of the photo stubs. A thumbnail photo is shown of
the appropriate photo. See the image below:

image::images/LoadImage5_f20.jpg["FIGURE:Thumbnail photo on dive profile", align="center"]

Clicking on the thumbnail brings up a full size photo overlaid on the
_Subsurface_ window, allowing a good view of the photographs (see the image
below). *Note* that the thumbnail has a small dustbin icon in the bottom
right hand corner (see image above). Selecting the dustbin removes the image
from the dive. Be careful when clicking on a thumbnail. Images can also be
deleted using the _Photos_ tab (see text below).

image::images/LoadImage6_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Full-screen photo on dive profile", align="center"]

==== The _Photos_ tab

Photographs associated with a dive are shown as thumbnails in the _Photos_
tab of the _Notes_ panel. Photos taken in rapid succession during a dive
(therefore sometimes with large overlap on the dive profile) can easily be
accessed in the _Photos_ tab. This tab serves as a tool for individually
accessing the photos of a dive, while the stubs on the dive profile show
when during a dive a photo was taken. Single-click a thumbnail in the
_Photos_ panel to select a photo. Double-click a thumbnail to view the
full-sized image, overlaying the _Subsurface_ window. Deleted a photo from
the _Photos_ panel by selecting it (single-click) and then by pressing the
_Del_ key on the keyboard. This removes the photo BOTH from the _Photos_ tab
as well as the dive profile.

==== Photos on an external hard disk
Most underwater photographers store photos on an external drive. If such a
drive can be mapped by the operating system (almost always the case) the
photos can be directly accessed by _Subsurface_. This eases the interaction
between _Subsurface_ and an external repository of photos. When associating
a dive profile with photos from an external drive, the normal procedure of
selection and synchronization (see text above) is used.  After the external
drive has been disconnected, _Subsurface_ cannot access these photos any
more.  If the display of photos is activated (using the toolbox icon to the
left of the _Dive Profile_), the program shows a small white dot where each
photo should be on the dive profile.  In addition the _Photos_ tab shows
only the file names of the photos.  If the external drive with the photos is
re-connected, the photos can be seen in the normal way.

[[S_FindMovedImages]]
==== Moving photographs among directories, hard disks or computers

After a photograph has been loaded into _Subsurface_ and associated with a specific dive,
_Subsurface_ saves the directory path where the photo lies as well as the file name of the photo,
in order to find it when the dive is opened again.
If the photo or the whole photo collection is moved to another drive or to a different
 machine, the path to the photo changes. Now, _Subsurface_ looks for the photos at their original location before they were moved,
 cannot find them and cannot display them. Because, after moving photos, large numbers of photos
 may need to be deleted and re-imported from the new location, _Subsurface_ has a mechanism to ease this inconvenience: automatic updates using fingerprints.

When a photo is loaded into _Subsurface_, a fingerprint for the image is calculated and stored with the
 other reference information for that photo. After moving a photo collection (that has already been loaded
 into _Subsurface_) to a different directory, disk or computer, _Subsurface_ can:

- look through a particular directory (and all its subdirectories recursively)
  where photos have been moved to,
- calculate fingerprints for all photos in this directory, and

if there is a match between a calculated fingerprint and the one calculated
when a photo was originally loaded into _Subsurface_ (even if the original
file name has changed), automatically update the directory information so
that _Subsurface_ can find the photo in the new moved directory.

This is done by selecting from the Main Menu: _File ->      Find moved images_. This brings up a window within
 which the NEW directory of the photos needs to be specified. Select the appropriate directory and click
 the _Scan_ button towards the bottom right of the panel. The process may require several minutes to
 complete, after which _Subsurface_ will show the appropriate photographs when a particular dive is opened.


[[Image_fingerprint_upgrade]]
****
*Upgrading legacy photo collections without fingerprints*
[icon="images/icons/important.png"]
[IMPORTANT]

_Subsurface_ automatically calculates fingerprints for all images that it
can access.  When manipulating images, ensure that all the images associated
with the dive log can be accessed by _Subsurface_.

_Subsurface_ automatically checks and, if necessary, updates the
fingerprints associated with a single dive if:

- The images associated with that dive are visible as thumbnails on the *Dive
  Profile*.

- If you edit anything in the *Notes* panel and save the edits by selecting
  _Apply changes_.

****


=== Logging special types of dives

This section gives examples of the versatility of _Subsurface_ as a dive
logging tool.


[[S_MulticylinderDives]]
==== Multicylinder dives

_Subsurface_ easily handles dives involving more than one
cylinder. Multi-cylinder diving usually happens (a) if a diver doesn’t have
enough gas for the complete dive in a single cylinder; (b) if a diver needs
more than one gas mixture because of the depth or the decompression needs of
the dive. For this reason multi-cylinder dives are often used by technical
divers who dive deep or long. As far as _Subsurface_ is concerned, there are
only two types of information that need to be provided:

- *Describe the cylinders used during the dive* This is performed in the *Equipment tab* of
  the *Info* panel, as xref:cylinder_definitions[described above]. Enter the cylinders one by one,
  specifying its size and pressure, as well as the gas composition within it.

- *Record the times at which the switch from one cylinder to another was done:* This is information
  tracked by some dive computers (provided the diver indicated these changes to the dive computer
  by pressing specific buttons). If the dive computer does not provide the information, the diver has to
  record these changes using a different method, e.g. writing it on a slate or by creating a bookmark on the dive
  computer.

- *Record the cylinder changes on the dive profile*: If the latter option
  was followed, the diver needs to indicate the gas change event by right-clicking at the appropriate point
  in time on the *Dive Profile* panel and indicating the cylinder to which the change was made. After
  right-clicking, follow the context menu to "Add gas change" and select the appropriate cylinder from
  those defined during the first step, above (see image below). If the
  *tank bar* button in the toolbar has been activated, the cylinder switches are also indicated in the
  tank bar (image below).

When this is complete, _Subsurface_ indicates the appropriate use of
cylinders in the dive profile.  Below is a two-cylinder dive, starting off
with EAN28, then changing cylinders to EAN50 after 26 minutes for
decompression.

image::images/multicylinder_dive.jpg["FIGURE: Multicylinder profile", align="center"]

==== Sidemount dives

Sidemount diving is just another form of multi-cylinder diving, often with
both or all cylinders having the same gas mixture. Although it’s a popular
configuration for cave divers, sidemount diving can be done by recreational
divers who’ve completed the appropriate training. Sidemount dive logging
involves three steps, exactly as with multi-cylinder dives above:

- *During the dive, record cylinder switch events*. Since sidemount diving normally involves two
  cylinders with air or with the same gas mixture, _Subsurface_ distinguishes between these different
  cylinders. In contrast, many dive computers that allow gas switching only distinguish between different
  _gases_ used, not among different _cylinders_ used. This means when sidemount dives are downloaded
  from these dive computers, the switching event between cylinders with the same gas is not downloaded. This may mean
  that a diver may have to keep a written log of cylinder switch times using a slate, or (if the dive computer
  has the capability) marking each cylinder switch with a bookmark that can be retrieved later. Returning
  from a dive with the times of cylinder changes is the only tedious part of logging sidemount dives.
- *Within _Subsurface_ describe the cylinders used during the dive*. The diver needs to provide the
  specifications of the different cylinders, using the *Equipment* tab of the *Info Panel* (see
  image below where two 12 litre cylinders were used).
- *Indicate cylinder change events on the _Subsurface_ dive profile*. Once the dive log has been imported
  from a dive computer into _Subsurface_, the cylinder switch events need to be shown on the dive profile.
  Cylinder changes are recorded by right-clicking at the appropriate point on the dive profile, then
  selecting _Add gas change_. A list of the appropriate cylinders is shown with the
  currently used cylinder greyed out. In the image below Tank 1 is greyed out, leaving only Tank 2
  to be selected. Select the appropriate cylinder. The cylinder change is then shown on the dive
  profile with a cylinder symbol. If the *Tank Bar* is activated using the toolbar to the left of the
  profile, then the cylinder change is also shown on the Tank Bar (see image below). After all
  the cylinder change events have been recorded on the dive profile, the correct cylinder pressures
  for both cylinders are shown on the dive profile, as in the image below.

image::images/sidemount1.jpg["FIGURE: Sidemount profile", align="center"]

[[S_sSCR_dives]]
==== Semi-closed circuit rebreather (SCR) dives

[icon="images/halcyon_RB80.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Passive semi-closed rebreathers (pSCR) are a technical advance in diving
equipment that recirculates the breathing gas a diver uses, while removing
carbon dioxide from the exhaled gas. While a small amount (typically a
tenth) of the exhaled breathing gas is released into the water, a small
amount of fresh gas is released from the back gas cylinder (typically
containing nitrox).  A diver using a single cylinder of breathing gas can
therefore dive for much longer periods than using a recreational
open-circuit configuration. With pSCR equipment, a very small amount of
breathing gas is released every time the diver inhales. With active SCR
(aSCR) equipment, in contrast, a small amount of breathing gas is released
continuously from the back cylinder.

To log pSCR dives, no special procedures are required. Use the normal steps
outlined above:

- Select pSCR in the _Dive Mode_ dropdown list on the *Info* panel.

- pSCR diving often involves gas changes, requiring an additional cylinder.
  Define all the appropriate cylinders as described above and indicate the
  cylinder/gas changes as described above in the section on
  xref:S_MulticylinderDives[multicylinder dives].

If a pSCR _Dive Mode_ has been selected, the dive ceiling for that is
adjusted for the oxygen drop across the mouthpiece, which often requires
longer decompression periods. Below is a dive profile of a pSCR dive using
EAN36 on the back cylinder and oxygen for decompression. Note that this dive
lasted over two hours.

image::images/pSCR_profile.jpg["FIGURE: pSCR profile", align="center"]



[[S_CCR_dives]]
==== Closed circuit rebreather (CCR) dives

[icon="images/APD.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Closed system rebreathers use advanced technology to recirculate gas that
has been breathed. They also do two things to maintain a breathable oxygen
concentration:
a) remove carbon dioxide from the exhaled gas
regulate the oxygen concentration to remain within safe diving limits.  The
CCR interface of _Subsurface_ is currently experimental and under active
development. Subsurface currently supports Poseidon MkVI and APD
Discovery/Evolution dive computers. In contrast to a conventional
recreational dive computer, a CCR system computer does not allow the
download of a log containing multiple dives. Rather, each dive is stored
independently. This means that _Subsurface_ cannot download a dive log
directly from a CCR dive computer, but that it imports individual CCR dive
profiles in the same way it imports dive log data from other digital
databases: one dive at a time.

===== Import a CCR dive

See the section dealing with xref:S_ImportingAlienDiveLogs[Importing dive
information from other digital sources]. CCR dive data are currently
obtained from the proprietary software provided when purchasing CCR dice
equipment. See
<<_appendix_b_dive_computer_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information,Appendix
B>> for more complete information. Use that software to download the dive
data into a known directory. From the main menu of _Subsurface_, select
_Import -> Import log files_ to bring up the xref:Unified_import[universal
import dialogue]. As explained in that section, the bottom right hand of the
import dialogue contains a dropdown list (labled _Filter:_) of appropriate
devices that currently include (Poseidon) MkVI or APD log viewer
files. Import for other CCR equipment is under active development. Having
selected the appropriate CCR format and the directory where the original
dive logs have been stored from the CCR dive computer, select a particular
dive log file (in the case of the MkVI it is a file with a .txt
extension). After selecting the appropriate dive log, click the _Open_
button at the bottom right hand of the universal import dialogue.  The
selected dive is imported to the _Subsurface_ dive list.

===== Displayed information for a CCR dive

_Partial pressures of gases_: The graph of oxygen partial pressure shows the
information from the oxygen sensors of the CCR equipment. In contrast to
recreational equipment (where pO~2~ values are calculated based on gas
composition and dive depth), CCR equipment provide actual measurements of
pO~2~, derived from oxygen sensors.  In this case the graph for oxygen
partial pressure should be fairly flat, reflecting the setpoint settings
during the dive. The mean pO~2~ is NOT the mean oxygen partial pressure as
given by the CCR equipment, but a value calculated by _Subsurface_ as
follows:

- For TWO O~2~ sensors the mean value of the two sensors are given.

- For THREE-sensor systems (e.g. APD), the mean value is also used. However
  differences of more than 0,1 bar in the simultaneous readings of different
  sensors are treated as false. If one of the three sensors provides false
  data, it is ignored.

- If no sensor data are available, the pO~2~ value is assumed to be equal to
  the setpoint.

The mean pO~2~ of the sensors is indicated with a green line,

The oxygen setpoint values as well as the readings from the individual
oxygen sensors can be shown. The display of additional CCR information is
turned on by checking the appropriate boxes in the _Preferences_ panel
(accessible by selecting xref:S_CCR_options[_File -> Preferences ->
Graph_]). This part of the _Preferences_ panel is shown in the image below,
representing two checkboxes that modify the display of pO~2~ when the
appropriate toolbar button on the Dive Profile has been checked.

image::images/CCR_preferences_f20.jpg["FIGURE: CCR preferences panel", align="center"]

Checking any of these boxes allows the display of additional oxygen-related
information whenever the pO~2~ toolbar button on the _Profile_ panel is
activated.  The first checkbox allows the display of setpoint
information. This is a red line superimposed on the green oxygen partial
pressure graph and allows a comparison of the mean measured oxygen partial
pressure and the setpoint values, as shown below.

image::images/CCR_setpoint_f20.jpg["FIGURE: CCR setpoint and po2 graph", align="center"]

The second checkbox allows the display of the data from each individual
oxygen sensor of the CCR equipment. The data for each sensor is colour-coded
as follows:

- Sensor 1: grey
- Sensor 2: blue
- Sensor 3: brown

The mean oxygen pO~2~ is indicated by the green line. This allows the direct
comparison of data from each of the oxygen sensors, useful for detecting
abnormally low or erratic readings from a particular sensor.

image::images/CCR_sensor_data_f20.jpg["FIGURE: CCR sensor data graph", align="center"]

The setpoint data can be overlaid on the oxygen sensor data by activating
both of the above check boxes. Partial pressures for nitrogen (and helium,
if applicable) are shown in the usual way as for open circuit dives.

_Events_: Several events are logged, e.g. switching the mouthpiece to open
circuit.  These events are indicated by yellow triangles and, if you hover
over a triangle, a description of that event is given as the bottom line in
the xref:S_InfoBox[Information Box].

_Cylinder pressures_: Some CCR dive computers like the Poseidon MkVI record
the pressures of the oxygen and diluent cylinders. The pressures of these
two cylinders are shown as green lines overlapping the depth profile. In
addition, start and end pressures for both oxygen and diluent cylinders are
shown in the _Equipment Tab_.  Below is a dive profile for a CCR dive,
including an overlay of setpoint and oxygen sensor data, as well as the
cylinder pressure data. In this case there is agreement from the readings of
the two oxygen sensors.

image::images/CCR_dive_profile_f22.jpg["FIGURE: CCR dive profile", align="center"]

_Equipment-specific information_: Equipment-specific information gathered by
_Subsurface_ is shown in the xref:S_ExtraDataTab[Extra data tab]. This may
include setup information or metadata about the dive.

The deco ceiling calculated by Subsurface is not very accurate because the
precise pressure of nitrogen in the loop can usually not be determined from
the dive log imported from the CCR equipment. Many CCR dive computers,
however, report an internally-calculated deco ceiling that is reported in
the dive log, reflecting a more accurate assessment. The display of this
ceiling is activated by clicking the appropriate button to the left of the
dive profile:

image::images/icons/cceiling.jpg["DC ceiling icon"]

The default color of the computer-generated deco ceiling is white. This can
be set to red by checking the appropriate check box after selecting _File ->
Preferences -> Graph_.  Below is a dive profile indicating the dive
computer-generated deco ceiling:

image::images/CCR_dive_ceilingF22.jpg["FIGURE: CCR computer-generated deco ceiling", align="center"]

More equipment-specific information for downloading CCR dive logs for
Poseidon MkVI and APD equipment can be found in
xref:_appendix_b_dive_computer_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information[Appendix
B].

== Obtaining more information about dives entered into the logbook

=== The *Info* tab (for individual dives)

The Info tab gives some summary information about a particular dive that has
been selected in the *Dive List*. Useful information here includes the
surface interval before the dive, the maximum and mean depths of the dive,
the gas volume consumed, the surface air consumption (SAC) and the number of
oxygen toxicity units (OTU) incurred.

[icon="images/icons/info.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Gas consumption and SAC calculations: _Subsurface_ calculates SAC and Gas
consumption taking in account gas incompressibility, particularly at tank
pressures above 200 bar, making them more accurate.  Refer to
xref:SAC_CALCULATION[Appendix F] for more information.

[[S_ExtraDataTab]]
=== The *Extra Data* tab (usually for individual dives)

When using a dive computer, it often reports several data items that cannot
easily be presented in a standardised way because the nature of the
information differs from one dive computer to another. These data often
comprise setup information, metadata about a dive, battery levels, no fly
times, or gradient factors used during the dive. When possible, this
information is presented in the *Extra Data* tab. Below is an image showing
extra data for a dive using a Poseidon rebreather.

image::images/ExtraDataTab_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Extra Data tab", align="center"]

=== The *Stats* tab (for groups of dives)

The Stats tab gives summary statistics for more than one dive, assuming that
more than one dive has been selected in the *Dive List* using the standard
Ctrl-click or Shift-click of the mouse. If only one dive has been selected,
figures for only that dive are given. This tab shows the number of dives
selected, the total amount of dive time in these dives, as well as the
minimum, maximum and mean for the dive duration, water temperature and
surface air consumption (SAC). It also shows the depth of the shallowest and
deepest dives of those selected.

[[S_DiveProfile]]
=== The *Dive Profile*

image::images/Profile2.jpg["Typical dive profile", align="center"]

Of all the panels in _Subsurface_, the Dive Profile contains the most
detailed information about each dive. The Dive Profile has a *button bar* on
the left hand side, allowing control of several display options. The
functions of these buttons are described below. The main item in the Dive
Profile is the graph of dive depth as a function of time. In addition to
depth, it also shows the ascent and descent rates compared to the
recommended speed of going up or down in the water column. This information
is given using different colors:
|====================
|*Couleur*|*Vitesse de descente (m/min)*|*Vitesse de remontée (m/min)*
|Rouge|> 30|> 18
|Orange|18 - 30|9 - 18
|Jaune|9 - 18|4 - 9
|Vert clair|1.5 - 9|1.5 - 4
|Vert foncé|< 1.5|< 1.5
|=====================

The profile also includes depth readings for the peaks and troughs in the
graph.  So users should see the depth of the deepest point and other
peaks. Mean depth is plotted as a grey line, indicating mean dive depth up
to a particular moment during the dive.

[icon="images/icons/scale.jpg"]
[NOTE]
In some cases the dive profile does not fill the whole area of the *Dive
Profile* panel. Clicking the *Scale* button in the toolbar on the left of
the dive profile increases the size of the dive profile to fill the area of
the panel.

*Water temperature* is shown as a blue line with temperature values
placed adjacent to significant changes.


[[S_InfoBox]]
==== The *Information Box*
The Information box displays a large range of information about the dive
profile. Normally the Information Box is located to the top left of the
*Dive Profile* panel. If the mouse points outside of the *Dive Profile*
panel, then only the top line of the Information Box is visible (see
left-hand part of figure (*A*) below). The Information Box can be moved
around in the *Dive Profile* panel by click-dragging it with the mouse so
that it is not obstructing important detail. The position of the Information
Box is saved and used again during subsequent dive analyses.

image::images/InfoBox2.jpg["Figure: Information Box", align="center"]

When the mouse points inside the *Dive Profile* panel, the information box
expands and shows many data items. In this situation, the data reflect the
time point along the dive profile shown by the mouse cursor (see right-hand
part of figure (*B*) above where the Information Box reflects the situation
at the position of the cursor [arrow] in that image). Moving the cursor
horizontally lets the Information Box show information for any point along
the dive profile. It gives extensive statistics about depth, gas and ceiling
characteristics of the particular dive. These include: Time period into the
dive (indicated by a @), depth, cylinder pressure (P), temperature,
ascent/descent rate, surface air consumption (SAC), oxygen partial pressure,
maximum operating depth, equivalent air depth (EAD), equivalent narcotic
depth (END), equivalent air density depth (EADD), decompression requirements
at that instant in time (Deco), time to surface (TTS), the calculated
ceiling, as well as of the statistics in the Information Box, shown as four
buttons on the left of the profile panel. These are:

[icon="images/icons/MOD.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show the *Maximum Operating Depth (MOD)* of the dive, given the gas mixture
used. MOD is dependent on the oxygen concentration in the breathing gas.
For air (21% oxygen) it is around 57 m if a maximum pO~2~ of 1.4 is
specified in the *Preferences* section (select _File -> Preferences ->
Graph_ and edit the text box _pO~2~ in calculating MOD_.  When diving below
the MOD there is a markedly increased risk of exposure to the dangers of
oxygen toxicity.

[icon="images/icons/NDL.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show either the *No-deco Limit (NDL)* or the *Total Time to Surface
(TTS)*. NDL is the time duration that a diver can continue with a dive,
given the present depth, that does not require decompression (that is,
before an ascent ceiling appears). Once a diver has exceeded the NDL and
decompression is required (that is, there is an ascent ceiling above the
diver) then TTS gives the number of minutes required before the diver can
surface. TTS includes ascent time as well as decompression time. TTS is
calculated assuming an ascent surface air consumption (SAC) for the gas
currently used. Even if the profile contains several gas switches, TTS at a
specific moment during the dive is calculated using the current gas.  TTS
longer than 2 hours is not accurately calculated and Subsurface only
indicates _TTS > 2h_.

[icon="images/icons/SAC.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show the *Surface Air Consumption (SAC)*, an indication of the
surface-normalized respiration rate of a diver. The value of SAC is less
than the real respiration rate because a diver at 10m uses breathing gas at
a rate roughly double that of the equivalent rate at the surface. SAC gives
an indication of breathing gas consumption rate independent of the depth of
the dive, so the respiratory rates of different dives can be compared. The
units for SAC is liters/min or cubic ft/min.

[icon="images/icons/EAD.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show the *Equivalent Air Depth (EAD)* for nitrox dives as well as the
*Equivalent Narcotic Depth (END)* for trimix dives. These are important to
divers breathing gases other than air. Their values are dependent on the
composition of the breathing gas. The EAD is the depth of a hypothetical air
dive that has the same partial pressure of nitrogen as the current depth of
the nitrox dive at hand. A nitrox dive leads to the same decompression
obligation as an air dive to the depth equalling the EAD. The END is the
depth of a hypothetical air dive that has the same sum of partial pressures
of the narcotic gases nitrogen and oxygen as the current trimix dive. A
trimix diver can expect the same narcotic effect as a diver breathing air
diving at a depth equalling the END.

Figure (*B*) above shows an information box with a nearly complete set of
data.

[[S_gas_pressure_graph]]
===== The Gas Pressure Bar Graph

On the left of the *Information Box* is a vertical bar graph showing the
pressures of the nitrogen (and other inert gases, e.g. helium, if
applicable) that the diver was inhaling _at a particular instant during the
dive_, shown by the position of the cursor on the *Dive Profile*. The
drawing on the left below indicates the meaning of the different parts of
the Gas Pressure Bar Graph.

image::images/GasPressureBarGraph.jpg["FIGURE:Gas Pressure bar Graph", align="center"]

- The light green area indicates the gas pressure, with the top margin of the
  light green area showing the total gas pressure of ALL gases inhaled by the
  diver and measured from the bottom of the graph to the top of the light
  green area. This pressure has a _relative_ value in the graph and does not
  indicate absolute pressure.

- The horizontal black line underneath the light green margin indicates the
  equilibrium pressure of the INERT gases inhaled by the diver, usually
  nitrogen. In the case of trimix, it is the pressures of nitrogen and helium
  combined. In this example, the user is diving with EAN32, so the equilibrium
  inert gas pressure is 68% of the distance from the bottom of the graph to
  the total gas pressure value.

- The dark green area at the bottom of the graph represents the pressures of
  inert gas in each of the 16 tissue compartments, following the Bühlmann
  algorithm, with fast tissues on the left hand side.

- The top black horizontal line indicates the inert gas pressure limit
  determined by the gradient factor that applies to the depth of the diver at
  the particular point on the *Dive Profile*. The gradient factor shown is an
  interpolation between the GFLow and GFHigh values specified in the _Graph_
  tab of the *Preferences Panel* of _Subsurface_.

- The bottom margin of the red area in the graph indicates the Bühlman-derived
  M-value. That is the pressure value of inert gases at which bubble formation
  is expected to be severe, resulting in a significant risk of decompression
  sickness.

These five values are shown on the left in the image above. The way the Gas
Pressure Bar Graph changes during a dive can be seen on the right hand side
of the above figure for a diver using EAN32.

- Graph *A* indicates the start of a dive with the diver at the surface. The
  pressures in all the tissue compartments are still at the surface
  equilibrium pressure because no diving has taken place.

- Graph *B* indicates the situation after a descent to 30 meters. Few of the
  tissue compartments have had time to respond to the descent, so their gas
  pressures are far below the equilibrium gas pressure.

- Graph *C* represents the pressures after 30 minutes at 30 m. The fast
  compartments have attained equilibrium (i.e. they have reached the height of
  the black line indicating the equilibrium pressure). The slower compartments
  (towards the right) have not reached equilibrium and are in the process of
  slowly increasing in pressure.

- Graph *D* shows the pressures after ascent to a depth of 4.5 meters. Since
  during ascent the total inhaled gas pressure has decreased strongly from 4
  bar to 1.45 bar, the pressures in the different tissue compartments now
  exceed that of the total gas pressure and approach the gradient factor value
  (i.e.  the top black horizontal line). Further ascent will result in
  exceeding the gradient factor value (GFHigh), endangering the diver.

- Graph *E* indicates the situation after remaining at 4.5 meters for 10
  minutes. The fast compartments have decreased in pressure. As expected, the
  pressures in the slow compartments have not changed much.  The pressures in
  the fast compartments do not approach the GFHigh value any more and the
  diver is safer than in the situation indicated in graph *D*.

==== The Profile Toolbar

The dive profile can include graphs of the *partial pressures* of O~2~,
N~2~, and He during the dive (see figure above) as well as a calculated and
dive computer reported deco ceilings (only visible for deep, long, or
repetitive dives).  Partial pressures of oxygen are indicated in green,
nitrogen in black, and helium in dark red. These partial pressure graphs are
shown below the profile data.

[icon="images/icons/O2.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show the partial pressure of *oxygen* during the dive. This is shown below
the dive depth and water temperature graphs.

[icon="images/icons/N2.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Show the partial pressure of *nitrogen* during the dive.

[icon="images/icons/He.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Display of the partial pressure of *helium* during the dive.  This is only
important to divers using Trimix, Helitrox or similar breathing gasses.

The *air consumption* graph displays the tank pressure and its change during
the dive. The air consumption takes depth into account so that even when
manually entering the start and end pressures the graph, is not a straight
line.  Like the depth graph, the slope of the tank pressure provides
information about the momentary SAC rate (Surface Air Consumption) when
using an air integrated dive computer.  Here the color coding is not
relative to some absolute values but relative to the mean normalized air
consumption during the dive. So areas in red or orange indicate times of
increased normalized air consumption while dark green reflects times when
the diver was using less gas than average.

[icon="images/icons/Heartbutton.png"]
[NOTE]
Clicking on the heart rate button allows display of heart rate information
during the dive if the dive computer was attached to a heart rate sensor.

It is possible to *zoom* into the profile graph. This is done either by
using the scroll wheel / scroll gesture of the mouse or trackpad. By default
_Subsurface_ always shows a profile area large enough for at least 30
minutes and 30m (100ft) – this way short or shallow dives are easily
recognizable; something free divers won’t care about.

image::images/MeasuringBar.png["FIGURE: Measuring Bar", align="center"]

[icon="images/icons/ruler.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Measurements of *depth or time differences* can be achieved by using the
*ruler button* on the left of the dive profile panel.  The measurement is
done by dragging the red dots to the two points on the dive profile that you
wish to measure. Information is then given in the horizontal white area
underneath the two red dots.

[icon="images/icons/ShowPhotos.png"]
[NOTE]
Photographs that have been added to a dive can be shown on the profile by
selecting the *Show-photo* button. The position of a photo on the profile
shows the exact time when this photo was taken. If this button is not
active, the photos are hidden.


The profile can also include the dive computer reported *ceiling* (more
precisely, the deepest deco stop that the dive computer calculated for each
particular moment in time) as a red overlay on the dive profile. Ascent
ceilings occur when a direct ascent to the surface increases the risk of a
diver suffering from decompression sickness (DCS) and it is necessary to
either ascend slower or to perform decompression stop(s) before ascending to
the surface. Not all dive computers record this information and make it
available for download; for example none of the Suunto dive computers make
these data available to divelog software. _Subsurface_ also calculates
ceilings independently, shown as a green overlay on the dive profile.
Because of the differences in algorithms used and amount of data available
(and other factors taken into consideration at the time of the calculation)
it’s unlikely that ceilings from dive computers and from _Subsurface_ are
the same, even if the same algorithm and _gradient factors_ (see below) are
used.  It’s also quite common that _Subsurface_ calculates a ceiling for
non-decompression dives when the dive computer stayed in non-deco mode
during the whole dive (represented by the [green]#dark green# section in the
profile at the beginning of this section). This is because _Subsurface’s_
calculations describe the deco obligation at each moment during a dive,
while dive computers usually take the upcoming ascent into account. During
the ascent some excess nitrogen (and possibly helium) are already breathed
off so even though the diver technically encountered a ceiling at depth, the
dive still does not require a specific deco stop. This feature lets dive
computers offer longer non-stop bottom times.

[icon="images/icons/cceiling.jpg"]
[NOTE]
If the dive computer itself calculates a ceiling and makes it available to
_Subsurface_ during upload of dives, this can be shown as a red area by
checking *Dive computer reported ceiling* button on the Profile Panel.

[icon="images/icons/ceiling1.jpg"]
[NOTE]
If the *Calculated ceiling* button on the Profile Panel is clicked, then a
ceiling, calculated by _Subsurface_, is shown in green if it exists for a
particular dive (*A* in figure below). This setting can be modified in two
ways:

[icon="images/icons/ceiling2.jpg"]
[NOTE]
If, in addition, the *show all tissues* button on the Profile Panel is
clicked, the ceiling is shown for the tissue compartments following the
Bühlmann model (*B* in figure below).

[icon="images/icons/ceiling3.jpg"]
[NOTE]
===============================================================================================================
If, in addition, the *3m increments* button on the Profile Panel is clicked,
then the ceiling is indicated in 3 m increments (*C* in figure below).

image::images/Ceilings2.jpg["Figure: Ceiling with 3m resolution", align="center"]

Gradient Factor settings strongly affect the calculated ceilings and their
depths. For more information about Gradient factors, see the section on
xref:GradientFactors_Ref[Gradient Factor Preference settings]. The currently
used gradient factors (e.g. GF 35/75) are shown above the depth profile if
the appropriate toolbar buttons are activated. N.B.: The indicated gradient
factors are NOT the gradient factors in use by the dive computer, but those
used by Subsurface to calculate deco obligations during the dive. For more
information external to this manual see:

 *** http://www.tek-dive.com/portal/upload/M-Values.pdf[Understanding M-values by Erik Baker, _Immersed_ Vol. 3, No. 3.]

 *** link:http://www.rebreatherworld.com/general-and-new-to-rebreather-articles/5037-gradient-factors-for-dummies.html[Gradient factors for dummies, by Kevin Watts]
===============================================================================================================



[icon="images/icons/ShowCylindersButton.jpg"]
[NOTE]
By selecting this icon, the different cylinders used during a dive can be
represented as a colored bar at the bottom of the *Dive Profile*. In general
oxygen is represented by a green bar, nitrogen a yellow bar and helium a red
bar. The image below shows a dive which first uses a trimix cylinder (red
and green), followed by a switch to a nitrox cylinder (yellow and green)
after 23 minutes. Cylinders with air are shown as a light blue bar.

image::images/ShowCylinders_f20.jpg["Figure: Cylinder use graph", align="center"]



[icon="images/icons/heatmap.png"]
[NOTE]
====================================================================================
Display the tissue heat-map. The heat map summarises, for the duration of
the dive, the inert gas tissue pressures for each of the 16 tissue
compartments of the Bühlmann model. Blue colours mean low gas pressures in a
tissue compartment and thus on-gassing, green to red means excess gas in the
tissue and thus off-gassing. Fast to slow tissues are indicated from top to
bottom. The figure below explains in greater detail how the heat map can be
interpreted.

image::images/Heatmap.jpg["Figure: Inert gas tissue pressure heat-map", align="center"]

Image *A* on the left shows the xref:S_gas_pressure_graph[Gas Pressure
Graph] in the *Information box*, representing a snapshot of inert gas
pressures at a particular point in time during the dive. The inert gas
pressures of 16 tissue compartments are shown as dark green vertical bars
with the quick tissue compartments on the left and the slow tissue
compartments on the right. Refer to the section on the
xref:S_gas_pressure_graph[Gas Pressure Graph] for more details on the
different elements of this graph.

Image *B* shows a gradient of unique colours, spanning the whole range of
inert gas pressures.  It is possible to map the height of each of the dark
green vertical bars of *A* to a colour in *B*. For instance, the fastest
(leftmost) dark green verical bar in *A* has a height corresponding to the
medium green part of *B*. The height of this bar can therefore be summarised
using a medium green colour. Similarly, the highest dark green bar in *A* is
as high as the yellow part of *B*. The 14 remaining tissue pressure bars in
*A* can also be translated to colours. The colours represent three ranges of
tissue inert gas pressure:

 -  The bottom range in *B* (marked _On-gassing_) includes colours from light
    blue to black, representing tissue gas pressures below the equilibrium
    pressure of inert gas (bottom horizontal line in *A*). The measurement unit
    is the % of inert gas pressure, relative to the equilibrium inert gas
    pressure. In this range on-gassing of inert gas takes place because the
    inert gas pressure in the tissue compartment is lower than in the
    surrounding environment. Black areas in the heat map indicate that a tissue
    compartment has reached the equilibrium inert gas pressure, i.e. the inert
    gas pressure in the tissue compartment equals that of the water in which the
    diver is. The equilibrium pressure changes according to depth.

 -  The central range in *B* includes the colours from black to light green,
    when the inert gas pressure of a tissue compartment is higher than the
    equilibrium pressure but less than the ambient pressure.  In this zone
    decompression is not very efficient because the gradient of inert gas
    pressure from tissue to the environment is relatively small and indicated by
    dark green areas of the heat map.

 -  The top range in *B* (marked _Off-gassing_) includes colours from light
    green to red and white, repesenting tissue gas pressures above that of the
    total ambient pressure (top of light green area of *A*). The measurement
    unit is the % of inert gas pressure above ambient pressure, relative to the
    Bühlmann M-value gradient (bottom of red area in *A*). These tissue
    pressures are normally reached while ascending to a shallower depth.  Below
    a value of 100%, this range indicates efficient off-gassing of inert gas
    from the tissue compartment into the environment. Usually, efficient
    off-gassing is indicated by light green, yellow or orange colours.  Above
    100% (red to white in *B*) the M-value gradient is exceeded and the
    probability of decompression sickness increases markedly.

Image *C* shows the colour mapping of each of the vertical bars in *A*, the
fast tissues (on the left in *A*) depicted at the top and the slow tissue
compartments at the bottom of *C*. The highest vertical bar in *A* (vertical
bar 3rd from the left) is presented as the yellow rectangle 3rd from the top
in *C*. The 16 vertical bars in *A* are now presented as a vertical column
of 16 coloured rectangles, representing a snapshot of tissue compartment gas
pressures at a particular instant during the dive.

Image *D* is a compilation of similar colour mappings of 16 tissue
compartments during a 10-minute period of a dive, the colours representing
the inert gas loading of a tissue compartment at a point in time during the
dive. Faster tissues are shown at the top and slower tissues at the bottom,
with time forming the horizontal axis of the graph. The column of rectangles
in *C* can be found on the horizontal axis between 9 and 10 minutes.

The colours of the heat map are not affected by the gradient factor
settings.  This is because the heat map indicates tissue pressures relative
to the Bühlmann M-value gradient, and not relative to any specific gradient
factor. For more information external to this manual see:

http://www.tek-dive.com/portal/upload/M-Values.pdf[Understanding M-values by
Erik Baker, _Immersed_ Vol. 3, No. 3.]

Since the colours of the heat map are not affected by the gradient
factor(s), the heat map is also applicable when using the VPM-B
decompression model.

The image below compares the profiles and heat maps for two planned
decompression dives to 60m: the first using the Bühlmann decompression
model, the second using the VPM-B decompression model.  Both profiles have
the same total decompression time, but the VPM-B model requires deeper stops
early in the acent phase.

In both profiles, the inert gas pressures in the faster tissues rise much
more rapidly than the slower tissues during the descent and bottom phase,
with the colors transitioning from light blue through blue and purple to
black.  Similarly, the inert gas pressure in the fast tissues reduces more
rapidly than the slow tissues at each decompression stop, with colors
transitioning from red, orange and yellow to green and black.

The comparison of the two profiles and heatmaps shows that by including deep
stops, the oversaturation gradient in the faster tissues early in ascent
phase is reduced.  However, on-gassing of slower tissues continues during
the deep stops, which leads to greater oversaturation gradient in slower
tissues at the end of the dive.

image::images/tissueHeatmap.jpg["Figure: Inert gas tissue pressure heat-map", align="center"]
===================================================================================

==== The Dive Profile context menu

The context menu for the Dive Profile is accessed by right-clicking while
the mouse cursor is over the Dive Profile panel. The menu allows creating
Bookmarks, Gas Change Event markers, or manual CCR set-point changes other
than the ones that might have been imported from a Dive Computer. Markers
are placed against the depth profile line, with the time of the event
determined by the mouse cursor when the right mouse button was clicked to
bring up the menu. Gas Change events involve a selection of which gas is
being switched TO. The list of choices is based on the available gases
defined in the *Equipment* Tab. Setpoint change events open a dialog letting
you choose the next setpoint value. As in the planner, a setpoint value of
zero shows the diver is breathing from an open circuit system while any
non-zero value shows the use of a closed circuit rebreather (CCR).  By
right-clicking while over an existing marker a menu appears, adding options
to allow deletion of the marker, or to allow all markers of that type to be
hidden. Hidden events can be restored to view by selecting Unhide all events
from the context menu.

== Organizing the logbook (Manipulating groups of dives)

[[S_DiveListContextMenu]]
=== The Dive List context menu

Several actions on either a single dive, or a group of dives, can be
performed using the Dive List Context Menu.  It is found by selecting either
a single dive or a group of dives and then right-clicking.

image::images/ContextMenu.jpg["Figure: Context Menu", align="center"]

The context menu is used in many functions described below.

==== Customizing the columns showed in the *Dive List* panel

image::images/DiveListOptions.jpg["Example: Dive list info options", align="center"]

The default information in the *Dive List* includes, for each dive,
Dive_number, Date, Rating, Dive_depth, Dive_duration and Dive_location. This
information can be controlled and changed by right-clicking on the header
bar of the *Dive List*. For instance, a right-click on the 'Date' header
brings up a list of items that can be shown in the dive list (see
above). Select an item to be included in the *Dive List* or to be deleted
(reflected by the check symbols) and the list is immediately
updated. Preferences for information shown in the *Dive List* are saved and
used when _Subsurface_ is re-opened.

[[S_Renumber]]
=== Renumbering the dives

Dives are normally numbered incrementally from non-recent dives (low
sequence numbers) to recent dives (higher sequence numbers).  Numbering of
dives is not always consistent. For instance, when non-recent dives are
added, correct numbering does not automatically follow on because of the
dives that are more recent in date/time than the newly-added dive with an
older date/time. This requires renumbering the dives.  Do this by selecting
(from the Main Menu) _Log -> Renumber_. Provide the lowest sequence number
to be used.  This results in new sequence numbers (based on date/time)  for
all the dives in the *Dive List* panel.

Renumber a few selected dives in the dive list by selecting only the dives
that need renumbering. Right-click on the selected list and use the Dive
List Context Menu to perform the renumbering. A popup window appears letting
the user specify the starting number for the process.

[[S_Group]]
=== Grouping dives into trips and manipulating trips

For regular divers, the dive list can rapidly become very long. _Subsurface_
can group dives into _trips_. It does this by grouping dives that have
date/times not separated by more than two days and creating a single heading
for each diving trip represented in the dive log. Below is an ungrouped dive
list (*A*, on the left) as well as the corresponding grouped dive list of
five dive trips (*B*, on the right):

image::images/Group2.jpg["Figure: Grouping dives", align="center"]

Grouping into trips allows a rapid way of accessing individual dives without
having to scan a long lists of dives. To group the dives in a dive list,
(from the Main Menu) select _Log -> Auto group_. The *Dive List* panel now
shows only the titles for the trips.

==== Editing the title and associated information for a particular trip

Normally, in the dive list, minimal information is included in the trip
title.  More information about a trip can be added by selecting its trip
title bar from the *Dive List*. This shows a *Trip Notes* tab in the *Notes*
panel. Here you can add or edit information about the date/time, the trip
location and any other general comments about the trip as a whole (e.g. the
dive company that was used, the general weather and surface conditions
during the trip, etc.).  After entering this information, select *Save* from
the buttons at the top right of the *Trip Notes* tab. The trip title in the
*Dive List* panel should now reflect the edited information.

==== Viewing the dives during a particular trip

Once the dives have been grouped into trips, you can expand one or more
trips by clicking the expansion button [+/-] on the left of each trip
title. This expands the selected trip, revealing individual dives during the
trip.

==== Collapsing or expanding dive information for different trips

After selecting a particular trip in the dive list, the context menu allows
several options to expand or collapse dives within trips. This includes
expanding all trips and collapsing all trips.

==== Merging dives from more than one trip into a single trip

After selecting a trip title, the context menu allows the merging of trips
by either merging the selected trip with the trip below or with the trip
above. (Merge trip with trip below; Merge trip with trip above)

==== Splitting a single trip into more than one trip
If a trip includes ten dives, you can split this trip into two trips (trip
1: top 4 dives; trip 2: bottom 6 dives) by selecting and right-clicking the
top four dives. The resulting context menu lets the user create a new trip
by choosing the option *Create new trip above*. The top four dives are then
grouped into a separate trip. The figures below show the selection and
context menu on the left (A) and the completed action on the right (B):

image::images/SplitDive3a.jpg["FIGURE: Split a trip into 2 trips", align="center"]

=== Manipulating single dives

==== Delete a dive from the dive log

Dives can be permanently deleted from the dive log by selecting and
right-clicking them to bring up the context menu, then selecting *Delete
dive(s)*. Typically this would apply to a case where a user wishes to delete
workshop calibration dives of the dive computer or dives of extremely short
duration.

==== Unlink a dive from a trip

You can unlink dives from the trip to which they belong. To do this, select
and right-click the relevant dives to bring up the context menu. Then select
the option *Remove dive(s)  from trip*. The dive(s) now appear immediately
above or below the trip to which they belonged, depending on the date and
time of the unlinked dive.

==== Add a dive to the trip immediately above

Selected dives can be moved from the trip to which they belong and placed
within a separate trip. To do this, select and right-click the dive(s) to
bring up the context menu, and then select *Create new trip above*.

==== Shift the start time of dive(s)
Sometimes it’s necessary to adjust the start time of a dive. This may apply
to situations where dives are done in different time zones or when the dive
computer has a wrong time. To do this, select and right-click the dive(s) to
be adjusted. This brings up the context menu on which the *Shift times*
option should be selected. You must then specify the time (in hours and
minutes) by which the dives should be adjusted and click on the option of
whether the time adjustment should be earlier or later.

==== Merge dives into a single dive

Sometimes a dive is briefly interrupted, for example, if a diver returns to
the surface for a few minutes, resulting in two or more dives being recorded
by the dive computer and appearing as different dives in the *Dive List*
panel.  Merge these dives onto a single dive by selecting the appropriate
dives, right-clicking them to bring up the context menu and then selecting
*Merge selected dives*. It may be necessary to edit the dive information in
the *Notes* panel to reflect events or conditions that apply to the merged
dive. The figure below shows the depth profile of two dives that were
merged:

image::images/MergedDive.png["Example: Merged dive", align="center"]

==== Undo dive manipulations

Important actions on dives or trips, described above, can be undone or
redone.  This includes: _delete dives_, _merge dives_, _renumber dives_ and
_shift dive times_.  To do this after performing any of these actions, from
the *Main Menu* select _Edit_. This brings up the possibility to _Undo_ or
_Redo_ an action.


[[S_Filter]]
=== Filtering the dive list

The dives in the *Dive List* panel can be filtered, selecting only some of
the dives based on their attributes, e.g. dive tags, dive site, dive master,
buddy or protective clothing. For instance, filtering lets you list the deep
dives at a particular dive site, or otherwise the cave dives with a
particular buddy.

To open the filter, select _Log -> Filter divelist_ from the main menu. This
opens the _Filter Panel_ at the top of the _Subsurface_ window. Three icons
are located at the top right hand of the filter panel (see image below). The
_Filter Panel_ can be reset (i.e. all current filters cleared) by selecting
the *yellow angled arrow*. The _Filter Panel_ may also be minimized by
selecting the *green up-arrow*. When minimized, only these three icons are
shown.  The panel can be maximized by clicking the same icon that minimized
it. The filter may also be reset and closed by selecting the *red button*
with the white cross.

image::images/Filterpanel.jpg["Figure: Filter panel", align="center"]

Four filter criteria may be used to filter the dive list: dive tags, person
(buddy / divemaster), dive site and dive suit.  Each of these is represented
by a check list with check boxes. Above each check list is a second-level
filter tool, allowing the listing of only some attributes within that check
list. For instance, typing "_ca_" in the filter text box above the tags
check list, results in the list being reduced to "_cave_" and
"_cavern_". Filtering the check list helps to rapidly find search terms for
filtering the dive list.

To activate filtering of the dive list, check at least one check box in one
of the four check lists. The dive list is then shortened to include only the
dives that pertain to the criteria specified in the check lists.  The four
check lists work as a filter with _AND_ operators. Subsurface filters
therefore for _cave_ as a tag AND _Joe Smith_ as a buddy. But the filters
within a category are inclusive - filtering for _cave_ and _boat_ shows
those dives that have either one OR both of these tags.

[[S_ExportLog]]
== Exporting the dive log or parts of the dive log

There are two ways to export dive information from Subsurface:

- Exporter les informations de plongée vers _Facebook_

- xref:S_Export_other[Exporter des informations de plongée vers d'autres
  destinations ou formats]

[[S_facebook]]
=== Export des informations de plongée vers _Facebook_

L'export des plongées vers _Facebook_ est géré différemment des autres types
d'export car une connexion vers _Facebook_ est nécessaire, nécessitant un
identifiant et un mot de passe. À partir du menu principal, si vous
sélectionnez _Partager sur -> Connecter à -> Facebook_, un écran de
connexion s'affiche (image *A* sur la gauche, ci dessous). Entrez
l'identifiant et le mot de passe _Facebook_. Une fois connecté à _Facebook_,
le panneau de l'image *B* ci dessous est affiché, avec un bouton
_Déconnecter de Facebook_ pour fermer la connexion _Facebook_.

image::images/facebook1_f20.jpg["Figure: Facebook login", align="center"]

From the _Subsurface_ window it’s easy to determine whether _Subsurface_ has
a valid connection to _Facebook_ From the *Main Menu*, select _Share on_
(image *A*, below). Normally, the _Facebook_ option is greyed out. But if
there is a connection to _Facebook_, this option is active (i.e. in black
color and can be selected).

Une fois qu'une connexion à _Facebook_ est établie, transférer un profil de
plongée vers _Facebook_ est facile. Assurez-vous que la plongée à transférer
est affichée dans le panneau *Profil de plongée* de _Subsurface_. Si, à
partir du *menu principal*, vous sélectionnez _Partager sur -> Facebook_,
une fenêtre s'affiche, pour déterminer quelles informations seront
transférées avec le profil de plongée (voir l'image *B* ci-dessous). Pour
transférer un profil de plongée vers _Facebook_, le nom d'un album
_Facebook_ doit être fourni. Les cases à cocher sur la partie gauche
permettent de sélectionner des informations supplémentaires à transférer
avec le profil de plongée. Ces informations sont affichées dans le champs de
texte sur la partie droite du panneau. (image *B* ci dessous). Vous pouvez
facilement modifier le message qui sera envoyé avec le profil de
plongée. Une fois les informations supplémentaires ajoutées et vérifiées,
sélectionner le bouton _OK_ qui lance le transfert vers _Facebook_. Après un
moment, une fenêtre apparait indiquant le succès du transfert.

À la fois l'album créé et la publication sur votre ligne temporelle seront
marquées comme privés. Pour que vos amis puissent la voir, modifier les
permissions à partir d'une connexion Facebook standard depuis un navigateur
ou l'application Facebook.

image::images/facebook2_f20.jpg["Figure: Facebook login", align="center"]

Si besoin, fermer la connexion _Facebook_ en fermant _Subsurface_ ou en
sélectionnant _Fichier -> Préférences -> Facebook, à partir du menu
principal et en cliquant sur le bouton approprié dans le panneau des
préférences Facebook.

[[S_Export_other]]
=== Exporter des informations de plongée vers d'autres destinations ou formats
For non-_Facebook exports_, the export function can be found by selecting
_File -> Export_, which brings up the Export dialog. This dialog always
gives two options: save ALL dives, or save only the dives selected in *Dive
List* panel of _Subsurface_. Click the appropriate radio button (see images
below).

image::images/Export_f20.jpg["Figure: Export dialog", align="center"]

A dive log or part of it can be saved in several formats:

* _Subsurface XML_ format. This is the native format used by _Subsurface_.

* Universal Dive Data Format (_UDDF_). Refer to _http://uddf.org_ for more
  information.  UDDF is a generic format that enables communication among many
  dive computers and computer programs.

* _Divelogs.de_, an Internet-based dive log repository. In order to upload to
  _Divelogs.de_, you need a user-ID as well as a password for
  _Divelogs.de_. Log into _http://en.divelogs.de_ and subscribe to this
  service to upload dive log data from _Subsurface_.

* _DiveShare_ is also a dive log repository on the Internet focusing on
  recreational dives. To upload dives, you need a user ID, so registration
  with _http://scubadiveshare.com_ is required.

* _CSV dive details_, that includes the most critical information of the dive
  profile. Included information of a dive is: dive number, date, time, buddy,
  duration, depth, temperature and pressure: in short, most of the information
  that recreational divers enter into handwritten log books.

* _CSV dive profile_, that includes a large amount of detail for each dive,
  including the depth profile, temperature and pressure information of each
  dive.

* _HTML_ format, in which the dive(s) are stored in HTML files, readable with
  an Internet browser. Most modern web browsers are supported, but JavaScript
  must be enabled. The HTML export cannot be changed or edited.  It contains
  most of the information recorded in the dive log. However, it does not show
  the calculated values in the *Dive Profile* panel, e.g. dive ceiling,
  calculated cylinder pressure, gas pressures and MOD. The HTML export
  contains a search option to search the dive log. HTML export is specified on
  the second tab of the Export dialog (image *B* above). A typical use of this
  option is to export all your dives to a smartphone or a tablet where it
  would serve as a portable record of dives, useful for dive companies wishing
  to verify the dive history of a diver, and doing away with the need to carry
  an original logbook when doing dives with dive companies.

* _Worldmap_ format, an HTML file with a world map upon which each dive and
  some information about it are indicated. This map is not editable. If you
  select any of the dive sites on the map, a summary of the dive is available
  in text, as shown in the image below.

image::images/mapview_f20.jpg["Figure: HTML Map export view", align="center"]


* _Image depths_, which creates a text file that contains the file names of
  all photos or images attached to any of the selected dives in the _Dive
  List_, together with the depth underwater where of each of those photos was
  taken.

* _General Settings_, under the HTML tab, provides the following options:

** Subsurface Numbers: if this option is checked, the dive(s) are exported with the
   numbers associated with them in Subsurface, Otherwise the dive(s) will be numbered
   starting from 1.
** Export Yearly Statistics: if this option is checked, a yearly statistics table will
   be attached to the HTML exports.
** Export List only: a list of dives only (date, time, depth, duration) will be exported
   and the detailed dive information, e.g. dive profile, will not be available.

* Under _Style Options_ some style-related options are available like font
  size and theme.

Export to other formats can be done through third party facilities, for
instance _www.divelogs.de_.

[[S_Cloud_access]]
== Keeping a _Subsurface_ dive log in the Cloud

For each diver, dive log information is highly important. Not only is it a
record of diving activities for your pleasure, but it’s important
information required for admission to training courses or sometimes even
diving sites. The security of the dive log is critical. To have a dive log
that is resistant to failure of a home computer hard drive, loss or theft of
equipment, the Cloud is an obvious solution. This also has the added benefit
that you can access your dive log from anywhere in the world. For this
reason, facilities such as _divelogs.de_ and _Diving Log_ offer to store
dive log information on the Internet.

_Subsurface_ includes access to a transparently integrated cloud storage
back end that is available to all Subsurface users. Storing and retrieving a
dive log from the cloud is no more difficult than accessing the dives on the
local hard disk.  The only requirement is that you should first register as
a user on the cloud.  To use _Subsurface cloud storage_ , follow these
steps:

=== Create a cloud storage account

** Open the *Network Preferences* by selecting _File_ -> _Preferences_ -> _Network_.
** In the section headed _Subsurface cloud storage_, enter an email address that
   _Subsurface_ can use for user registration.
** Enter a novel password that _Subsurface_ will use to store the
  dive log in the cloud.
** Click _Apply_ to send the above email address and password to the
  (remote) cloud server. The server responds by sending a verification PIN to
  the above email address (This is the *only* occasion that _Subsurface_ uses the
  email address provided above). The *Network Preferences* dialog now has a new PIN text
   box, not visible previously.
** Enter the PIN in the corresponding text box in the *Network Preferences* dialog
(this field is only visible while the server is waiting for email
address confirmation)
** Click _Apply_ again. The _Subsurface cloud storage_ account
will be marked as verified and the _Subsurface cloud storage_ service is initialised for use.

=== Using _Subsurface cloud storage_

** Once the cloud storage has been initialized, two new items appear in the
   _File_ menu of the main menu system: _Open cloud storage_ and _Save to cloud storage_.
These options let you load and save data to the _Subsurface
cloud storage_ server.
** In the _Defaults Preferences_ tab, you can select to use the _Subsurface cloud
storage_ data as the default data file by checking the box marked _Cloud storage default file_.
 This means the data from
the _Subsurface cloud storage_ is loaded when _Subsurface_ starts and saved there when _Subsurface_ closes.

** _Subsurface_ keeps a local copy of the data and the cloud facility remains fully
functional even if used while disconnected to the Internet. _Subsurface_ simply synchronizes the
data with the cloud server the next time the program is used while the computer is
connected to the Internet.

[[S_Cloud_storage]]
=== Web access to _Subsurface cloud storage_

One of the nice side benefits of using _Subsurface cloud storage_ is that
you can also access your dive data from any web browser. Simply open
https://cloud.subsurface-divelog.org[_https://cloud.subsurface-divelog.org_],
log in with the same email and password, and you can see an HTML export of
the last dive data that was synced to _Subsurface cloud storage_. The dive
information shown is only the contents of the recorded dive logs, NOT the
calculated values shown in the *Profile* panel, including some cylinder
pressures, deco ceilings and O~2~/He/N~2~ partial pressures.

=== Other cloud services

If you prefer not to use the integrated cloud storage of dive logs (and
don't need the web access), it’s simple to store dive logs in the cloud
using several of the existing facilities on the Internet.  For instance
http://www.dropbox.com/[_Dropbox_] offers a free application that allows
files on the Dropbox servers to be seen as a local folder on a desktop
computer.

image::images/Cloud.jpg["FIGURE: Dropbox folder", align="center"]

The _Dropbox_ program creates a copy of the _Dropbox_ Internet Cloud content
on your desktop computer. When the computer is connected to the Internet,
the Internet content is automatically updated. Therefore both the _Open_ and
_Save_ of dive logs are done using the local copy of the dive log in the
local _Dropbox_ folder, so there's no need for a direct internet
connection. If the local copy is modified, e.g. by adding a dive, the remote
copy in the _Dropbox_ server in the Cloud will be automatically updated
whenever Internet access is available.

In this way a dive log in your _Dropbox_ folder can be accessed seamlessly
from the Internet and can be accessed anywhere with Internet
access. Currently there are no costs involved for this service. Dropbox
(Windows, Mac and Linux) can be installed by accessing the
http://www.dropbox.com/install[_Install Page on the Dropbox website_]
Alternatively you can use _Dropbox_ as a way back up your dive log. To Store
a dive log on _Dropbox_, select _File -> Save as_ from the _Subsurface_ main
menu, navigate to the _Dropbox_ folder and select the _Save_ button. To
access the dive log in _Dropbox_, select _File -> Open Logbook_ from the
_Subsurface_ main menu and navigate to the dive log file in the _Dropbox_
folder and select the _Open_ button.

Several paid services exist on the Internet (e.g. Google, Amazon) where the
same process could be used for the Cloud-based storage of dive logs.


[[S_PrintDivelog]]
== Printing a dive log

_Subsurface_ provides a simple and flexible way to print a whole dive log or only a few selected dives.
  Pre-installed templates or a custom written template can be used to choose where the data are fitted into the page.

Some decisions need to be made before printing:

- Should the whole dive log be printed or only part of it? If only part is
  required, select the required dives from the *Dive List* panel.
- If the dive profiles are printed, what gas partial pressure information
  should be shown? Select the appropriate toggle-buttons on the button bar to
  the left of the *Dive Profile* panel.

If _File -> Print_ is selected from the Main menu, the dialogue below (image
*A*) appears. Three specifications are needed to get the desired information
and page layout:

image::images/Print1_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print dialogue", align="center"]

1. Under _Print type_ select one of two options:

- _Dive list print_: Print dives from the *Dive List* panel with profiles and
  other information.
- _Statistics print_: Print yearly statistics of the dives.

2. Under _Print options_ select:

- Printing only the dives selected from the dive list before activating the
  print dialogue by checking the box _Print only selected dives_. If this
  check box is *not* checked ALL dives in the *Dive List* panel are printed.
- Printing in color, done by checking the box with _Print in color_. If this
  check box is not checked, printing is in black and white.

Under _Template_ select a template to be used as the page layout. There are
several choices.  (see image *B*, above).

- _Table_: This prints a summary table of all dives selected (see below).

image::images/Print_summarylist_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print summary table", align="center"]

- _Flow layout_: Print the text associated with each dive without printing the
  dive profiles
     of each dive (see below):

image::images/Print_flow_layout_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print flow layout", align="center"]

- _One Dive_: Print one dive per page, also showing the dive profile (see
  below)

image::images/print2_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print one dive / page", align="center"]


- _Two Dives_: Print two dives per page, also showing the dive profiles.
- _Six Dives_: Print six dives per page, also showing the dive profiles.

You can _Preview_ the printed page by selecting the _Preview_ button on the
dialogue (see image *A* at the start of this section). After preview, you
can change the options in the print dialogue, so the layout fits personal
taste.

Next, select the _Print_ button (see image *A* at the start of this
section). This activates the regular print dialogue used by the operating
system, letting you choose a printer and set its properties (see image
below):

image::images/Print_print_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print dialog", align="center"]

Set the print resolution of the printer to an appropriate value by changing
the printer _Properties_. Finally, select the _Print_ button to print the
dives.  Below is a (rather small) example of the output for one particular
page.

image::images/Printpreview.jpg["FIGURE: Print preview page", align="center"]

=== Créer un modèle d'impression personnalisé (avancé)

Writing a custom template is an effective way to produce highly customized
printouts. Subsurface uses HTML templates to render printing. You can create
a template, export a new template, import an existing template and delete an
existing template by using the appropriate buttons under the _Template_
dropdown list in the print dialogue. See <<S_APPENDIX_E,APPENDIX E>> for
information on how to write or modify a template.

[[S_Configure]]
== Configurer un ordinateur de plongée

_Subsurface_ vous permet de configurer un ordinateur de
plongée. Actuellement, les familles d'ordinateurs supportés sont
Heinrichs-Weikamp (OSTC 2, OSTC 3) et Suunto Vyper (Stinger, Mosquito, D3,
Vyper, Vytec, Cobra, Gekko et Zoop). De nombreux paramètres de ces
ordinateurs de plongée peuvent être lues et modifiées. Pour s'assurer que
les pilotes pour votre ordinateur de plongée sont installés (également
nécessaire pour télécharger les plongées) et que le nom de périphérique de
l'ordinateur de plongée est connu. Voir
<<_appendix_a_operating_system_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information_from_a_dive_computer,
ANNEXE A>> pour plus d'informations sur la manière de procéder.

Une fois que l'ordinateur de plongée est connecté à _Subsurface_,
sélectionner _Fichier -> Configurer l'ordinateur de plongée_, à partir du
menu principal. Sélectionner le nom du périphérique (ou le point de montage)
dans la liste déroulante, en haut du panneau de configuration et
sélectionner le bon modèle d'ordinateur de plongée à partir du panneau à
gauche (voir l'image ci-dessous).

image::images/Configure_dc_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Configure dive computer", align="center"]

En utilisant les boutons appropriés du panneau de configuration, les actions
suivantes peuvent être effectuées :

 - *Récupérer les détails disponibles*. Cela charge la configuration existante à partir de l'ordinateur de plongée
   dans _Subsurface_, en l'affichant dans le panneau de configuration.
 - *Enregistrer les modifications sur le périphérique*. Cela change la configuration de l'ordinateur
   de plongée pour correspondre aux informations affichées dans le panneau de configuration.
 - *Sauvegarder*. Cela enregistre la configuration dans un fichier. _Subsurface_ demande
   l'emplacement et le nom du fichier pour enregistrer les informations.
 - *Restaurer une sauvegarde*. Cela charge les informations à partir d'un fichier de sauvegarde et l'affiche
   dans le panneau de configuration.
 - *Mettre à jour le firmware*. Si un nouveau firmware est disponible pour l'ordinateur de plongée,
   il sera chargé dans l'ordinateur de plongée.


[[S_Preferences]]
== Setting user _Preferences_ for _Subsurface_

There are several user-definable settings within _Subsurface_, found by
selecting _File -> Preferences_, mostly affecting the way in which
_Subsurface_ shows dive information to the user. The settings are in six
panels: _Defaults_, _Units_, _Graph_, _Language_, _Network_, and
_Georeference_, all of which operate on the same principles: specified
settings can be applied to the display of the dive log by selecting
_Apply_. At this stage, any new settings only apply to the present session
and are not saved. In order to apply new settings permanently, select the
_Save_ button. If you do not wish to apply the new preferences, select
_Cancel_.

=== Defaults

There are several headings in the *Defaults* panel:

image::images/Pref1_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Preferences defaults page", align="center"]

  ** *Lists and tables*: Specify the font type and font size of the
     *Dive Table* panel: decreasing the font size allows one to see more dives on a screen.

  ** *Dives*: For the _Default Dive Log File_ specify the directory and
     file name of your
     electronic dive log book. This is a file with filename extension of either _.xml_ or _.ssrf_. When
     launched, _Subsurface_ will automatically load the specified dive log book. There are three options:
     - _No default file_: When checked, _Subsurface_ does not automatically load a dive log at startup.
     - _Local default file_: When checked, _Subsurface_ automatically loads a dive log from the local hard disk.
     - _Cloud storage default file_: When checked, _Subsurface automatically loads the dive log from the cloud
       device that was initialized using the *Preferences* _Network_ tab (see below).

  ** *Display invalid*:  Dives can be marked as invalid (when a user wishes to hide
     dives that he/she doesn't consider valid dives, e.g. pool dives, but still want to
     keep them in the dive log). This controls whether those dives are displayed in
     the dive list.

  ** *Default cylinder*: From the dropdown list, select the default cylinder to be used in
     the *Equipment* tab of the *Notes* panel.

  ** *Animations*: Some actions in showing the dive profile are performed using
     animations. For instance, the axis values for depth and time change from dive to
     dive. When viewing a different dive, these changes in axis characteristics do not
     happen instantaneously, but are animated. The _Speed_ of animations can be controlled
     by setting this slider
     with faster animation speed to the left, and a 0 value representing no animation
     at all.

  ** *Clear all settings*: As indicated in the button below this heading, all settings are
     cleared and set to default values.

=== Units
image::images/Pref2_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Preferences Units page", align="center"]

Choose between metric and imperial units of depth, pressure, volume,
temperature and mass. By selecting the Metric or Imperial radio button at
the top, you can specify that all units are in the chosen measurement
system.  Alternatively, if you select the *Personalize* radio button, units
can be selected independently, with some in the metric system and others in
imperial.

Regardless of the above settings, dive time measurements can be either in
seconds or minutes.  Choose the appropriate option. GPS coordinates can be
represented either as traditional coordinates (degrees, minutes, seconds) or
as decimal degrees Choose the appropriate option.

=== Graph
This panel has three sections:

[[S_CCR_options]]
image::images/Pref4_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Preferences Graph page", align="center"]

[[S_GradientFactors]]
*Gas pressure display setup*. Even though nitrogen and helium pressures are also included here, these items mainly pertain to oxygen management:
** _Thresholds_: _Subsurface_ can display graphs of the nitrogen, oxygen and the helium
   partial pressures during
   the dive, activated using the toolbar on the left of the *Dive Profile*
   panel. For each of these graphs, specify a threshold value. If any of the graphs go
   above the specified threshold, the graph is
   highlighted in red, indicating the particular partial pressure threshold has been exceeded.
   The pO~2~ threshold is probably the most important one and a value of 1.6 is commonly used.
** _pO~2~ in calculating MOD_ is used for calculating the maximum operative depth for a particular
   nitrox or trimix gas mixture. A value of 1.4 is commonly used.

** CCR Options: These options determine oxygen management for CCR dives:

*** _Dive planner default setpoint_: Specify the O~2~ setpoint for a
    CCR dive plan. This determines the pO~2~  maintained
    during a particular dive. Setpoint changes during the dive can be added via the
    profile context menu.

*** _CCR: Show setpoints when viewing pO2:_ With this checkbox activated, the pO~2~
    graph on the dive profile has an overlay in red which indicates the CCR setpoint
    values. See the section on xref:S_CCR_dives[Closed Circuit Rebreather dives].

*** _CCR: Show individual O~2~ sensor values when viewing pO~2~:_ Show the pO~2~
    values associated with each of the individual oxygen sensors of a CCR system.
    See the section on xref:S_CCR_dives[Closed Circuit Rebreather dives].

* *Ceiling display setup*. These settings mostly deal with nitrogen and helium management
   by determining how the decompression ceiling (ascent ceiling) is calculated and displayed:

** _Draw dive computer reported ceiling red_: This checkbox does exactly what it says. By default
   the computer reported ceiling is shown in white.
   Not all dive computers report ceiling values. If the dive computer does report it, it may differ
   from the ceilings calculated by _Subsurface_ because of the different algorithms and
   gradient factors, as well as the dynamic way a
   dive computer calculates ceilings during a dive.

** _Algorithm for calculating ceiling_. Choose between the Bühlmann Z1H-L16
   decompression model and the VPM-B model:
*** _VPM-B_: Provide a conservatism level for calculating the VPM-B ceiling. Values between 0
    (least conservative) and 4 (most conservative) are valid.

[[GradientFactors_Ref]]

*** Bühlmann: Set the _gradient factors_ (GFlow and GFHigh) for calculcating the deco ceiling following
   the ZH-L16 algorithm. GF_Low is the gradient factor at depth and GF_High is used at the surface.
   At intermediate depths gradient factors between GF_Low and GF_High are used.
   Gradient factors add conservatism to nitrogen and helium exposure during a dive, in a
   similar way that many dive computers have a conservatism setting. The lower
   the value of a gradient factor, the more conservative the calculations are with
   respect to inert gas loading and the deeper the ceilings are. Gradient
   factors of 20/60 are considered conservative and values of 70/90 are considered
   harsh.
   In addition decide whether to check the _GFLow at max depth_ box. If checked, GF_Low is used for the
   deepest dive depth and linearly increased up to the GF_High value at the surface. If unchecked,
   GF_Low is used between the deepest dive depth and the first deco stop, after which the
   gradient factor linearly increases up to the GF_High value at the surface. For more information see:

 *** http://www.tek-dive.com/portal/upload/M-Values.pdf[Understanding M-values by Erik Baker, _Immersed_ Vol. 3, No. 3.]

 *** link:http://www.rebreatherworld.com/general-and-new-to-rebreather-articles/5037-gradient-factors-for-dummies.html[Gradient factors for dummies, by Kevin Watts]

 **  _pSCR options_. These preferences determine how passive semi-closed circuit (pSCR) dives
    are planned and how the pSCR deco ceiling is calculated:

 *** _Metabolic rate:_ this is the
    volume of oxygen used by a diver during a minute. Set this value for pSCR dive planning
    and decompression calculations.

 *** _pSCR ratio:_ The dilution ratio (or dump ratio) is the ratio of gas released to the
    environment to that of the gas recirculated to the diver. A 1:10 ratio is commonly used.

* *Misc*

** _Show unused cylinders in Equipment Tab_: This checkbox allows display of information about unused cylinders when viewing the
*Equipment Tab*. If this box is not checked, and if any cylinders entered using the *Equipment Tab* are not used (e.g. there
was no gas switch to such a cylinder), then these cylinders are omitted from that list.
**  _Show mean depth_: If this box is checked, the *Dive Profile* panel contains a grey line that shows
    the mean depth of the dive, up to any time instant during the dive. Normally this is a u-shaped line indicating the deepest mean depth just before
   ascent.


=== Language
Choose a language that _Subsurface_ will use.

image::images/Pref3_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Preferences Language page", align="center"]

Check the _System Default_ language i.e. the language of the underlying
operating system if this is appropriate. This is the default setting in
_Subsurface_.  To change it, uncheck this checkbox and pick a language /
country combination from the list of locations. The _Filter_ text box to
list similar languages. For instance there are several system variants of
English or French. *This particular preference requires a restart of
_Subsurface_ to take effect*.

In this section also specify appropriate date an time formats for showing
dive details.

=== Network
This panel facilitates communication between _Subsurface_ and data sources
on the Internet.  This is important, for instance, when _Subsurface_ needs
to communicate with web services such as Cloud storage or the
<<S_Companion,_Subsurface Companion app_>>. These Internet requirements are
determined by your type of connection to the Internet and by the Internet
Service Provider (ISP) used.  Your ISP should provide the appropriate
information.

image::images/Pref5_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Preferences Network page", align="center"]

This dialogue has three sections:

** _Proxy type_:
If a proxy server is used for Internet access, the type of proxy needs to be selected from the dropdown list,
after which the IP address of the host and the appropriate port number should
be provided. If the proxy server uses authentication, the appropriate userID and
password are required so that _Subsurface_ can automatically pass
through the proxy server to access the Internet. This information is usually obtained
from your ISP.

** _Subsurface cloud storage_: To store your dive log in the cloud, a valid email address
   and password are required. This lets _Subsurface_ email security information
   regarding cloud storage to you, and to set up cloud storage appropriately.
   Two additional options are given:
   - _Sync to cloud in the background_: This option allows saving of dive information to the cloud storage
   while you do other things within _Subsurface_.
   - _Save password locally_: This allows local storage of the cloud storage password. Note that this
   information is saved in raw text form, not encoded in any way.

** _Subsurface web service_: When you subscribe to the <<S_Companion,Subsurface web service>>, a very
     long and hard-to-remember userID is issued. This is the place to save that userID. By
     checking the option _Save User ID locally?_, you ensure a local copy of that userID is saved.

=== Georeference

_Subsurface_ provides a geo-lookup service (that is, given the coordinates
of a dive site) derived from a click on the *Dive Map panel* at the bottom
right of the _Subsurface_ window, or from a GPS instrument or from the
_Subsurface_ Companion app). A search on the Internet is done to find the
name of the closest known location. This function only works if _Subsurface_
has an Internet connection. The preference of the dive site name can be
configured, e.g. _Country/State/City_ or _City/State/Country_ (see image
below).

image::images/Pref7_f23.jpg["FIGURE: Georeference panel", align="center"]

[[S_DivePlanner]]
== The _Subsurface_ dive planner
Dive planning is an advanced feature of _Subsurface_, accessed by selecting
_Log -> Plan Dive_ from the main menu. It allows calculation of inert gas
load during a dive by using the Bühlmann ZH-L16 algorithm with the addition
of gradient factors as implemented by Erik Baker.

****
[icon="images/icons/warning2.png"]
[WARNING]

The _Subsurface_ dive planner IS CURRENTLY EXPERIMENTAL and assumes the user
is already familiar with the _Subsurface_ user interface. It is explicitly
used under the following conditions:

- The user is conversant with dive planning and has the necessary training to
  perform dive planning.
- The user plans dives within his/her certification limits.
- Dive planning makes large assumptions about the characteristics of the
  _average person_ and cannot compensate for individual physiology or health
  or personal history or life style characteristics.
- The safety of a dive plan depends heavily on the way in which the planner is
  used.
- The user is familiar with the user interface of _Subsurface_.
- A user who is not absolutely sure about any of the above requirements should
  not use this feature.
****

=== The _Subsurface_ dive planner screen

Like the _Subsurface_ dive log, the planner screen is divided into several
sections (see image below). The *setup* parameters for a dive are entered
into the sections on the left hand side of the screen.  They are: Available
Gases, Rates, Planning, Gas Options and Notes.

At the top right hand is a green *design panel* on which the profile of the
dive can be manipulated directly by dragging and clicking as explained
below. This feature makes the _Subsurface_ dive planner unique in ease of
use.

At the bottom right is a text panel with a heading of _Dive Plan
Details_. This is where the details of the dive plan are provided in a way
that can easily be copied to other software. This is also where any warning
messages about the dive plan are printed.

image::images/PlannerWindow1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Dive planner startup window", align="center"]


=== Open circuit dives

-  Towards the center bottom of the planner (circled in blue in the image
   above) is a dropbox with three options. Select the appropriate one of these:
 ** Open Circuit (the default)
 ** CCR
 ** pSCR

- Choose the Open Circuit option.
- In the top left-hand area of the planning screen, be sure the constant dive
  parameters are appropriate. These are: Start date and time of the intended
  dive, Atmospheric Pressure and Altitude above sea level of the dive
  site. The atmospheric pressure can also be entered as an altitude in meters,
  assuming a sea-level atmospheric pressure of 1.013 bar.

- In the table labelled _Available Gases_, add the information of the
  cylinders to be used as well as the gas composition within that
  cylinder. This is done in a similar way as for
  <<cylinder_definitions,providing cylinder data for dive logs>>. Choose the
  cylinder type by double clicking the cylinder type and using the dropdown
  list, then specify the work pressure of this cylinder. By leaving the oxygen
  concentration (O2%) field empty, the cylinder is assumed to contain
  air. Otherwise enter the oxygen and/or helium concentration in the boxes
  provided in this dialogue. Add additional cylinders by using the "+" icon to
  the top right-hand of the dialogue.

- The _Available Gases_ table includes three gas depth fields, labelled:
 ** Deco switch at: the switch depth for deco gases. Unless overridden by the user, this will be
    automatically calculated based on the Deco pO₂ preference (default 1.6 bar)
 ** Bot. MOD: the gas Maximum Operating Depth (MOD) if it is used as a bottom mix. Automatically
    calculated based on the Bottom pO₂ preference (default 1.4 bar). Editing this field will modify the
    O₂% according to the depth set. Set to ''*'' to calculate the best O₂% for the dive maximum depth.
 ** MND: the gas Maximum Narcotic Depth (MND). Automatically calculated based on the Best Mix END
    preference (default 30m / 98 ft). Editing this field will modify the He% according to the depth set.
    Set to ''*'' to calculate the best He% for the dive maximum depth.

- The profile of the planned dive can be created in two ways:
 *  Drag the waypoints (the small white circles) on the existing dive profile to
    represent the dive. Additional waypoints can be created by double-clicking
    the existing dive profile. Waypoints can be deleted by right-clicking a
    particular waypoint and selecting the _delete_ item from the resulting
    context menu.
 *  The most efficient way to create a dive profile is to enter the appropriate
    values into the table marked _Dive planner points_. The first line of the
    table represents the duration and the final depth of the descent from the
    surface. Subsequent segments describe the bottom phase of the dive.  The _CC
    set point_ column is only relevant for closed circuit divers.  The ascent is
    usually not specified because this is what the planner is supposed to
    calculate.  Add additional segments to the profile by selecting the "+" icon
    at the top right hand of the table. Segments entered into the _Dive planner
    points_ table automatically appear in the *Dive Profile* diagram.

==== Recreational dives

Recreational mode is what comes closest to planning a dive based on the non-decompression limit (NDL).
It computes the maximum time a diver can stay at the current depth without needing mandatory decompression
stops and without using more than the existing gas (minus a reserve). The planner automatically takes
into account the nitrogen load incurred in previous dives. But conventional dive tables are also used in a
way that can take into account previous dives. Why use a dive planner for recreational dives? Using
recreational dive tables, the maximum depth of a dive is taken into account. But few dives are
done at a constant depth corresponding to the maximum depth (i.e. a "square" dive profile). This means
dive tables overestimate the nitrogen load incurred during previous dives. The _Subsurface_
dive planner calculates nitrogen load according to the real dive profiles of all uploaded previous dives,
in a similar way as dive computers calculate nitrogen load during a dive. This means that the diver gets 'credit,'
in terms of nitrogen load, for not remaining at maximum depth during
previous dives, so a longer subsequent dive can be planned.
 For the planner to work it's crucial to upload all previous dives
onto _Subsurface_ before doing dive planning.
To plan a dive, the appropriate settings need to be defined.

Ensure the date and time is set to that of the intended dive. This allows
calculation of the nitrogen load incurred during previous dives.

- Immediately under the heading _Planning_ are two checkboxes _Recreational_
  and _Safety Stop_.  Check these two boxes.

- Then define the cylinder size, the gas mixture (air or % oxygen) and the
  starting cylinder pressure in the top left-hand section of the planner under
  _Available gases_.

- The planner calculates whether the specified cylinder contains enough
  air/gas to complete the planned dive. In order for this to be accurate,
  under _Gas options_, specify an appropriate surface air consumption (SAC)
  rate for _Bottom SAC_. Suitable values are between 15 l/min and 30 l/min,
  with novice divers or difficult dives requiring SAC rates closer to 30l/min.

- Define the amount of gas the cylinder must have at the end of the bottom
  section of the dive just before ascent. A value of 50 bar is often used. The
  reason for this reserve gas is to provide for the possible need to bring a
  buddy to the surface using gas sharing. How much gas is used in sharing
  depends on the depth of the ascent. This can be difficult to estimate, so
  most agencies assume a fixed amount of gas, or actually of pressure e.g. 40
  or 50 bar or 25% or 33% (rule of thirds). But _Subsurface_ can do better
  because it knows about the ascent and that is why we add the amount of gas
  during the ascent (i.e. the "deco gas“).  Subsurface still uses a fixed
  pressure "reserve" but that's supposed to be for the additional gas used
  when there's a problem and your pulse rate goes up when you start to buddy
  breathe. This reserve amount is user configurable.

- Define the depth of the dive by dragging the waypoints (white dots) on the
  dive profile or (even better) defining the appropriate depths using the
  table under _Dive planner points_ as desribed under the previous heading. If
  this is a multilevel dive, set the appropriate dive depths to represent the
  dive plan by adding waypoints to the dive profile or by adding appropriate
  dive planner points to the _Dive Planner Points_ table. _Subsurface_ will
  automatically extend the bottom section of the dive to the maximum duration
  within the no-decompression limits (NDL).

- The ascent speed can be changed. The default ascent speeds are those
  considered safe for recreational divers.

The dive profile in the planner shows the maximum dive time within no-deco
limits using the Bühlmann ZH-L16 algorithm and the gas and depth settings
specified as described above. The _Subsurface_ planner allows rapid
assessment of dive duration as a function of dive depth, given the nitrogen
load incurred during previous dives. The dive plan includes estimates of the
amount of air/gas used, depending on the cylinder settings specified under
_Available gases_. If the initial cylinder pressure is set to 0, the dive
duration shown is the true no-deco limit (NDL) without taking into account
gas used during the dive. If the surface above the dive profile is RED it
means that recreational dive limits are exceeded and either the dive
duration or the dive depth needs to be reduced.

Below is an image of a dive plan for a recreational dive at 30
meters. Although the no-deco limit (NDL) is 23 minutes, the duration of the
dive is limited by the amount of air in the cylinder. That is shown in the
text box at the bottom right of the panel, requiring sufficient air for
buddy-sharing during ascent.

image::images/rec_diveplan.jpg["FIGURE: A recreational dive plan: setup", align="center"]

==== Non-recreational open circuit dives, including decompression

Non-recreational dive planning involves exceeding the no-deco limits and/or
using multiple breathing gases.  These dives are planned in three stages:

*a) Nitrogen management*: This is done by specifying the rates for descent and ascent,
as well as the deco model (GFLow, GFHigh or Conservatism level) under the headings _Rates_ and _Planning_
to the bottom left of the planning screen. Two deco models are supported the Bühlmann model and the VPM-B
model. Select one of the two models. When selecting the Bühlmann model, the gradient factors (GFhigh and GFlow
need to be specified. Initially, the GFHigh and GFLow values in the _Preferences_
panel of _Subsurface_ is used. If these are changed within the planner (see _Gas Options_ within
the planner), the new values are
used without changing the original values in the _Preferences_.
Gradient Factor settings strongly affect the calculated ceilings and their depths.
A very low GFLow value brings on decompression stops early during the dive.
 ** For more information about Gradient factors, see the section on xref:S_GradientFactors[Gradient Factor Preference settings].

If the VPM-B model is selected, the Conservatism_level needs to be specified
on a scale of 0 (least conservative) to 4 (most conservative).  This model
tends to give deco stops at deeper levels than the Bühlmann model and often
results in slightly shorter dive durations than the Bühlmann model, albeit
at the cost of higher tissue compartment pressures in the slow tissues.
When selecting one of these models, keep in mind they are NOT exact
physiological models but only mathematical models that appear to work in
practice.

For more information external to this manual see:

 * link:http://www.tek-dive.com/portal/upload/M-Values.pdf[Understanding
   M-values by Erik Baker, _Immersed_ Vol. 3, No. 3.]
 * link:http://www.rebreatherworld.com/general-and-new-to-rebreather-articles/5037-gradient-factors-for-dummies.html[Gradient
   factors for dummies, by Kevin Watts]
link:http://www.amazon.com/Deco-Divers-Decompression-Theory-Physiology/dp/1905492073/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1403932320&sr=1-1&keywords=deco+for+divers[_Deco
for Divers_, by Mark Powell (2008). Aquapress] Southend-on-Sea, UK. ISBN 10:
1-905492-07-3.  Un excellent livre non technique qui traite à la fois des
modèles de décompression Bühlmann et VPM-B.

The ascent rate is critical for nitrogen off-gassing at the end of the dive
and is specified for several depth ranges, using the mean depth as a
yardstick. The mean depth of the dive plan is shown by a light grey line on
the dive profile. Ascent rates at deeper levels are often in the range of
8-12 m/min, while ascent rates near the surface are often in the range of
4-9 m/min. The descent rate is also specified. If the option _Drop to first
depth_ is activated, the descent phase of the planned dive will be at the
maximal descent rate specified in the _Rates_ section of the dive setup.

*b) Oxygen management*: In the *Gas Options* part of the dive specification, the maximum partial
pressure for oxygen needs to be specified for the
bottom part of the dive (_bottom po2_) as well as for the decompression part of the dive (_deco po2_).
Commonly used values are 1.4 bar for the bottom part of the dive and 1.6 bar for any decompression
stages. Normally, a partial pressure of 1.6 bar is not exceeded. PO2 settings and the depth at which switching to a gas takes place can also be edited in the
_Available Gases_ dialog. Normally the planner decides on switching to a new gas when, during
ascent, the partial pressure of the new gas has decreased to 1.6 bar.

*c) Gas management*: With open-circuit dives this is a primary
consideration. Divers need to keep within the limits of the amount of
gas within the dive
cylinder(s), allowing for an appropriate margin for a safe return to the surface, possibly
sharing with a buddy. Under the _Gas Options_ heading, specify the best (but conservative) estimate
of your surface-equivalent air consumption (SAC, also termed RMV) in
liters/min (for the time being, only SI units are supported). Specify the SAC during the
bottom part of the dive (_bottom SAC_) as well as during the decompression or safety stops of the
dive (_deco SAC_). Values of 15-30 l/min are common. For good gas management, a guess
is not sufficient and you needs to
monitor gas consumption on a regular basis, dependent on different dive conditions and/or equipment.
The planner calculates the total volume of gas used during the dive and issues a warning
if you exceeds the total amount of gas available. Good practice demands that divers not dive to
the limit of the gas supply but that an appropriate reserve is kept
for unforeseen circumstances.
For technical diving, this reserve can be up to 66% of the total available gas.

Now you can start the detailed time-depth planning of the dive. _Subsurface_
offers an unique graphical interface for doing planning. The mechanics are
similar to hand-entering a dive profile in the dive log part of
_Subsurface_. Upon activating the planner, a default dive of depth 15 m for
20 min is offered in the blue design surface to the top right hand of the
screen. The white dots (waypoints) on the profile can be dragged with a
mouse. Create more waypoints by double-clicking on the profile line and
ensuring the profile reflects the intended dive. Drag the waypoints to
represent the depth and duration of the dive. It is NOT necessary to specify
the ascent part of the dive since the planner calculates this, based on the
existing settings.  If any of the management limits (for nitrogen, oxygen or
gas) are exceeded, the surface above the dive profile changes from BLUE to
RED.

Each waypoint on the dive profile creates a _Dive Planner Point_ in the
table on the left of the dive planner panel. Ensure the _Used Gas_ value in
each row of that table corresponds to one of the gas mixtures specified in
the _Available Gases_ table.  Add new waypoints until the main features of
the dive have been completed, e.g. the bottom time segment and deep stops
(if these are implemented). Leave the remaining waypoints on the ascent to
_Subsurface_. In most cases _Subsurface_ computes additional way points in
order to fulfill decompression requirements for that dive. A waypoint can be
moved by selecting it and by using the arrow keys.  The waypoints listed in
the _Dive Planner Points_ dialogue can be edited by hand in order to get a
precise presentation of the dive plan. In fact, it is sometimes more easy to
create the whole dive profile by editing the _Dive Planner Points_ dialog.

Show any changes in gas cylinder used by indicating gas changes as explained
in the section <<S_CreateProfile,hand-creating a dive profile>>. These
changes should reflect the cylinders and gas compositions defined in the
table with _Available Gases_.  If two or more gases are used, automatic gas
switches will be suggested during the ascent to the surface. These changes
can be deleted by right-clicking the gas change and manually creating a gas
change by right-clicking on the appropriate waypoint.

A non-zero value in the "CC set point" column of the table of dive planner
points indicates a valid setpoint for oxygen partial pressure and that the
segment is dived using a closed circuit rebreather (CCR). If the last
manually entered segment is a CCR segment, the decompression phase is
computed assuming the diver uses a CCR with the specified set-point. If the
last segment (however short) is on open circuit (OC, indicated by a zero
set-point) the decompression is computed in OC mode and the planner only
considers gas changes in OC mode.

Below is an example of a dive plan to 45m using EAN26, followed by an ascent
using EAN50 and using the settings as described above.

image::images/DivePlanner2_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Planning a dive: setup", align="center"]

Once the above steps have been completed, save by clicking the _Save_ button
towards the top middle of the planner. The saved dive plan will appear in
the *Dive List* panel of _Subsurface_.

*The dive plan details*

On the bottom right of the dive planner, under _Dive Plan Details_, the
exact details of the dive plan are provided. These details may be modified
by checking any of the options under the _Notes_ section of the dive
planner, immediately to the left of the _Dive Plan Details_. If a _Verbatim
dive plan_ is requested, a detailed sentence-level explanation of the dive
plan is given. If any of the management specifications have been exceeded
during the planning, a warning message is printed underneath the dive plan
information.

If the option _Display segment duration_ is checked, then the duration of
each depth level is indicated in the _Dive Plan Details_. This duration
INCLUDES the transition time to get to that level. However, if the _Display
transition in deco_ option is checked, the transitions are shown separately
from the segment durations at a particular level.

=== Planning pSCR dives

To plan a dive using a passive semi-closed rebreather (pSCR), select _pSCR_ rather than
_Open circuit_ in the dropdown list.
The parameters of the pSCR dive can be set by selecting  _File ->   Preferences ->   Graph_
from the main menu, where the gas consumption calculation takes into account the pSCR dump
ratio (default 1:10) as well as the metabolic rate. The calculation also takes the oxygen drop
accross the mouthpiece of the rebreather into account. If the
pO~2~ drops below what is considered safe, a warning appears in the _Dive plan
details_. A typical pSCR configuration is with a single cylinder and one or more bail-out
cylinders. Therefore the setup of the _Available gases_ and the _Dive planner points_ tables
are very similar to that of a CCR dive plan, described below. However, no oxygen setpoints
are specified for pSCR dives. Below is a dive plan for a pSCR dive. The dive is comparable
to that of the CCR dive below, but note the longer ascent duration due to the lower oxygen
in the loop due to the oxygen drop across the mouthpiece of the pSCR equipment.

image::images/Planner_pSCR1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Planning a pSCR dive: setup", align="center"]


=== Planning CCR dives

To plan a dive using a closed circuit rebreather, select the _CCR_ option in
the dropdown list, circled in blue in the image below.

*Available gases*: In the _Available gases_ table, enter the cylinder information for the
diluent cylinder and for any bail-out cylinders. Do NOT enter the information for the oxygen
cylinder since it is implied when the _CCR_ dropdown selection is made.

*Entering setpoints*: Specify a default setpoint in the Preferences tab, by selecting _File ->  Preferences ->  Graph_ from
the main menu. All user-entered segments in the _Dive planner points_ table
use the default setpoint value. Then, different setpoints can be specified for dive segments
in the _Dive planner points_ table. A zero setpoint
means the diver bails out to open circuit mode for that segment. Decompression is always calculated
using the setpoint of the last manually entered segment. So, to plan a bail out ascent for a
CCR dive, add a one-minute dive segment to the end with a setpoint value of 0. The decompression
algorithm does not switch deco-gases automatically while in CCR mode (i.e. when a positive setpoint is specified) but
this is calculated for bail out ascents.

The dive profile for a CCR dive may look something like the image below.

image::images/Planner_CCR1_f20.jpg["FIGURE: Planning a CCR dive: setup", align="center"]

Note that, in the _Dive plan details_, the gas consumption for a CCR segment
is not calculated, so gas consumptions of 0 liters are the norm.

[[S_Replan]]
=== Modifying an existing dive plan

Normally, when a dive plan has been saved, it is accessible from the *Dive
List*, like any other dive log. Within the *Dive List* there is no way to
change a saved dive plan.  To change a dive plan, select it on the *Dive
List*. Then, in the main menu, select _Log -> Re-plan dive_. This will open
the selected dive plan within the dive planner, allowing changes to be made
and saved as usual.

In addition, there is the option "Save new". This keeps the original planned
dive and adds a (possibly modified, - earlier dives are now taken into
account -) copy to the dive list. If that copy is saved with the same start
time as the original, the two dives are considered two versions of the same
dive and do not influence other each during decompression calculation (see
next section).

=== Planning for repetitive dives

Repetitive dives can easily be planned if the dates and start times of the
repetitive dive set are specified appropriately in the top left-hand _Start
Time_ field. _Subsurface_ calculates the gas loading figures and the affect
of the first dive is evaluated on later dives.

If you have just completed a long/deep dive and are planning another dive,
then highlight, in the *Dive List*, the dive that has just been logged then
activate the planner. Depending on the start time of the planned dive, the
planner takes into account the gas loading during the completed dive and
plans accordingly.

If only a few standard configurations are used (e.g. in GUE), then a
template dive can be created conforming to one of the configurations. If you
want to plan a dive using this configuration, highlight the template dive in
the *Dive List* and activate the planner: the planner takes into account the
configuration in the highlighted dive.

=== Printing the dive plan

Selecting the _Print_ button in the planner allows printing of the _Dive
Plan Details_ for wet notes. You can also cut and paste the _Dive Plan
Details_ to include in a text file or word processing document.

Dive plans have many characteristics in common with dive logs (dive profile,
dive notes, etc).  After a dive plan has been saved, the dive details and
gas calculations are saved in the *Notes* tab. While a dive plan is being
designed, it can be printed using the _Print_ button in the dive
planner. This prints the dive details and gas calculations in the _Dive Plan
Details_ panel of the dive planner. However, after the plan has been saved,
it is represented in a way very similar to a dive log and the gas
calculations cannot be accessed in the same way as during the planning
process. The only way to print the dive plan is to use the _File -> Print_
function on the main menu in the same way as for dive logs or by copy and
paste to a word processor.

== Description des éléments du menu principal de Subsurface

Cette section décrit les fonctions et les opérations des éléments du menu
principal de Subsurface. Plusieurs éléments ci-dessous sont des liens vers
des sections de ce manuel traitant des opérations relatives.

=== Fichier
- <<S_NewLogbook,_Nouveau carnet de plongée_>> - Fermer le carnet de plongée
  actuellement ouvert et supprime toutes les informations de plongées.
- _Ouvrir un carnet de plongée_ - Ouvre une fenêtre pour sélectionner le
  carnet de plongée à ouvrir.
- _Sauvegarder_ - Enregistrer le carnet de plongée actuellement ouvert.
- _Enregsitrer sous_ - Enregistrer le carnet actuel sous un nom différent.
- _Open cloud storage_ - Open the dive log previously saved in
  <<S_Cloud_storage,_Cloud storage_>>.
- _Save to cloud storage_ - Save the current dive log to
  <<S_Cloud_storage,_Cloud storage_>>.
- _Take cloud storage online_ -
  ******************************************************
- _Fermer_ - Fermer le carnet de plongée actuellement ouvert.
- <<S_ExportLog,_Exporter_>> - Exporter le carnet de plongée actuellement
  ouvert (ou les plongées sélectionnées dans le carnet) vers un des nombreux
  formats.
- <<S_PrintDivelog,_Imprimer_>> - Imprimer le carnet de plongée actuellement
  ouvert.
- <<S_Preferences,_Préférences_>> - Définir les  préférences de _Subsurface_.
- <<S_FindMovedImages, _Find moved images_>> - If photos taken during dives
  have been moved to
      a different disk or directory, locate them and link them to the appropriate
      dives.
- <<S_Configure,_Configurer l'ordinateur de plongée_>> - Modifier la
  configuration d'un ordinateur de plongée.
- _Quitter_ - Quitter _Subsurface_.


=== Edit
- The Edit option allows one to undo or redo an action, e.g. deleting dives.

=== Importer
- <<S_ImportDiveComputer,_Importer depuis un l'ordinateur de plongée_>> -
  Importer des informations de plongées à partir de l'ordinateur de plongée.
- <<Unified_import,_Importer des fichiers de log_>> - Importer des
  informations de plongées à partir d'un fichier d'un format compatible avec
  _Subsurface_.
- <<S_Companion,_Importer les données GPS depis le service web Subsurface_>> -
  Charge les coordonnées GPS à partir de l'application mobile _Subsurface_
  (téléphones et tablettes).
- <<S_ImportingDivelogsDe,_Importer depuis Divelogs.de_>> - Importer des
  informations de plongées à partir de _www.Divelogs.de_.

=== Journal (log)
- <<S_EnterData,_Ajouter une plongée_>> -  Ajouter manuellement une nouvelle
  plongée au panneau de la *liste des plongées*.
- _Edit dive_ - Edit a dive where the profile was entered by hand and not from
  a dive computer.
- <<S_DivePlanner,_Planifier une plongée_>> - Planifier des plongées.
- <<S_Replan,_Modifier la plongée dans le planificateur_>> - Modifier une
  plongée planifiée qui a été enregistrée dans la *liste des plongées*.
- <<S_CopyComponents,_Copier les composants de la plongée_>> - Copier les
  informations de plusieurs champs d'un journal de plongée vers le
  presse-papier.
- _Coller les composants de la plongée_  - Colle, dans les plongées
  sélectionnées dans la *liste des plongées*, les informations copiées au
  préalable avec l'option _Copier les composants de la plongée_.
- <<S_Renumber,_Renuméroter_>> - Renuméroter les plongées sélectionnées dans
  le panneau de la *liste des plongées*.
- <<S_Group,_Grouper automatiquement_>> - Grouper les plongées du panneau de
  *liste des plongées* dans des voyages de plongées.
- <<S_DeviceNames,_Editer les noms des ordinateurs de plongée_>> - Modifier
  les noms des ordinateurs de plongée pour coordonner vos journaux (logs).
- <<S_Filter,_Filtrer la liste des plongées_>> - Sélectionner seulement
  certaines plongées, à partir de tags ou de critères de plongées.

=== Vue
- <<S_ViewPanels,_Tout_>> - Affiche les quatre panneaux principaux de
  _Subsurface_ simultanément.
- <<S_ViewPanels,_Liste des plongées_>> - Affiche uniquement le panneau de la
  *liste des plongées*.
- <<S_ViewPanels,_Profil_>> - Affiche uniquement le panneau du *profil de la
  plongée*.
- <<S_ViewPanels,_Info_>> - Affiche uniquement le panneau des *notes*.
- <<S_ViewPanels,_Globe_>> - Affiche uniquement le panneau de la *carte
  mondiale*.
- _Statistiques annuelles_  - Affiche par année le résumé des statistiques des
  plongées effectuées.
- _Prev DC_ - Switch to data from previous dive computer, if a single dive was
  logged from more than one.
- _Ordinateur suivant_  - Passer à l'ordinateur de plongée suivant.
- _Plein écran_  - Passer en mode plein écran.

=== Share on
- <<S_Facebook,_Facebook_>> - Partager la plongée sélectionnée sur votre
  Facebook.

=== Aide
- _À propos de Subsurface_  - Affiche un panneau avec le numéro de version de
  _Subsurface_ ainsi que les informations de licence.
- _Vérifier les mises à jour_  - Vérifier si une nouvelle version de
  Subsurface est disponible sur le http://subsurface-divelog.org/[site web de
  _Subsurface_ ].
- <<S_UserSurvey,_Sondge utilisateur_>> - Aider à rendre _Subsurface_ encore
  meilleur en répondant à notre sondage utilisateur ou en répondant à un autre
  sondage, si vos habitudes de plongées ont changées.
- _Manuel utilisateur_  - Ouvre une fenêtre affichant ce manuel utilisateur.



== ANNEXE A : informations spécifiques au système d'exploitation utilisé pour importer les informations de plongées depuis un ordinateur de plongée.

=== Assurez-vous que les pilotes (drivers) nécessaires sont installés
[icon="images/icons/drivers.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Le système d'exploitation de l'ordinateur nécessite les bons pilotes pour
communiquer avec l'ordinateur de plongée de la façon utilisée par
l'ordinateur de plongée (Bluetooth, USB, infra-rouge).

	* Sous Linux, les utilisateurs doivent avoir le bon module noyau de chargé. La
	  plupart des distributions Linux le font automatiquement, de telle sorte que
	  l'utilisateur n'ait rien à faire de particulier. Cependant, certains
	  protocoles de communication nécessitent des pilotes additionnels, plus
	  particulièrement pour certaines technologies telles que l'infra-rouge.

	* Sous Windows, le bon pilote devrait être téléchargé automatiquement la
	  première fois que l'utilisateur branche son ordinateur de plongée sur le
	  port USB de son ordinateur de bureau.

Sous Mac, les utilisateurs peuvent parfois avoir besoin d'installer
manuellement le bon pilote. Par exemple, pour le Mares Puck ou n'importe
quel autre ordinateur de plongée utilisant une interface USB-série basé sur
le composant Silicon Labs CP2101 ou similaire, le bon pilote est disponible
sous _Mac_OSX_VCP_Driver.zip_ sur le
http://www.silabs.com/support/pages/document-library.aspx?p=Interface&f=USB%20Bridges&pn=CP2101[dépôt
de documents et logiciels Silicon Labs].

[[S_HowFindDeviceName]]
=== Comment trouver le nom du périphérique branché sur USB et paramétrer les permissions en écriture
[icon="images/icons/usb.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Lors de la connexion d'un ordinateur de plongée en utilisant l'USB,
_Subsurface_ proposera généralement soit une liste déroulante avec le bon
nom (ou le point de montage pour un Uemis Zurich) ou la liste sera
désactivée si aucun nom de périphérique n'est nécessaire. Dans les rares cas
où cela ne fonctionnerait pas, voici quelques méthodes pour trouver le nom
de votre périphérique ;

.Sur Windows :

Essayez simplement COM1, COM2, etc. La liste déroulante devrait contenir
tous les périphériques COM connectés.

.Sur MacOS :

La liste déroulante devrait contenir tous les ordinateurs de plongée
connectés.

.Sur Linux :

Il existe un moyen sûr de trouver le port :

 - Déconnecter le cable USB de l'ordinateur de plongée
 - Ouvrir un terminal
 - Taper la commande 'dmesg' et appuyer sur la touche Entrer
 - Connecter le cable USB de l'ordinateur de plongée
 - Taper la commande 'dmesg' et appuyer sur la touche Entrer

Un message similaire à celui-ci devrait apparaitre :

	usb 2-1.1: new full speed USB device number 14 using ehci_hcd
	usbcore: registered new interface driver usbserial
	USB Serial support registered for generic
	usbcore: registered new interface driver usbserial_generic
	usbserial: USB Serial Driver core
	USB Serial support registered for FTDI USB Serial Device
	ftdi_sio 2-1.1:1.0: FTDI USB Serial Device converter detected
	usb 2-1.1: Detected FT232BM
	usb 2-1.1: Number of endpoints 2
	usb 2-1.1: Endpoint 1 MaxPacketSize 64
	usb 2-1.1: Endpoint 2 MaxPacketSize 64
	usb 2-1.1: Setting MaxPacketSize 64
	usb 2-1.1: FTDI USB Serial Device converter now attached to ttyUSB3
	usbcore: registered new interface driver ftdi_sio
	ftdi_sio: v1.6.0:USB FTDI Serial Converters Driver

La troisième ligne en partant du bas montre que l'adaptateur FTDI USB est
détecté et connecté sur +ttyUSB3+. Cette information peut à présent être
utilisée pour les paramètres d'importation en tant que +/dev/ttyUSB3+ pour
que Subsurface utilise le bon port USB.

S'assurer que l'utilisateur possède les droits d'écriture sur le port série
USB :

Sur les systèmes similaires à Unix, les ports USB ne peuvent être accédés
que par des utilisateurs membres d'un groupe spécial qui peut être +dialout+
ou +uucp+. Cela peut être vérifié en listant les permissions associées au
périphérique, par exemple via +ls - l /dev/ttyUSB0+. Notez que le numéro
dans le nom de fichier dépend du nombre de périphériques USB que vous avez
branchés et peut être ajusté au besoin.Si vous n'êtes pas root, vous n'êtes
peut-être pas membre de ce groupe et ne pouvez donc pas utiliser le port
USB. Admettons que votre nom d'utilisateur soit 'johnB'.

En tant que root, tapez : usermod -a -G dialout johnB+ (utilisateurs
d'Ubuntu : +sudo usermod -a -G dialout johnB+)  Cela ajoute johnB au groupe
+dialout+.
Tapez : +id johnB+     Cela liste tous les groupes auquel johnB appartient et
vérifiez que
l'appartenance au groupe est bien effectif. Le groupe +dialout+ devrait
être listé
parmi les différents IDs.
Sous certaines circonstances, les modifications ne prennent effet qu'après une déconnexion
puis reconnexion sur l'ordinateur (sous Ubuntu, par exemple).

Avec le bon nom de périphérique (par exemple +dev/ttyUSB3+) et avec un accès
en écriture au port USB, l'ordinateur de plongée devrait se connecter et
vous devriez pouvoir importer vos plongées.


[[S_HowFindBluetoothDeviceName]]
=== Manually setting up Bluetooth enabled devices
[icon="images/icons/bluetooth.jpg"]
[NOTE]
For dive computers communicating through Bluetooth like the Heinrichs
Weikamp Frog or the Shearwater Predator, Petrel and Nerd there is a
different procedure to get the device’s name to communicate with
_Subsurface_. Follow these steps:

 * *For the dive computer, after enabling Bluetooth, be sure it is in Upload mode.*

For Bluetooth pairing of the dive computer, refer to the manufacturer's user
guide. When using a Shearwater Predator/Petrel/Nerd, select _Dive Log ->
Upload Log_ and wait for the _Wait PC_ message.

 * *Pair the _Subsurface_ computer with the dive computer.*

==== Sur Windows :

Bluetooth is most likely already enabled. For pairing with the dive computer
choose _Control Panel -> Bluetooth Devices -> Add Wireless Device_.  This
should bring up a dialog showing your dive computer (which should be in
Bluetooth mode) and allowing pairing. Right click on it and choose
_Properties-> COM Ports_ to identify the port used for your dive
computer. If there are several ports listed, use the one saying "Outgoing"
instead of "Incoming".

For downloading to _Subsurface_, the _Subsurface_ drop-down list should
contain this COM port already. If not, enter it manually.

Note: If there are issues afterwards when downloading from the dive computer
using other software, remove the existing pairing with the dive computer.

==== Sur MacOS :

Click on the Bluetooth symbol in the menu bar and select _Set up Bluetooth
Device..._. The dive computer should then show up in the list of
devices. Select it and go through the pairing process. This step should only
be needed once for initial setup.

Once the pairing is complete, the correct device is shown in the 'Device or
Mount Point' drop-down in the _Subsurface_ *Import* dialog.

==== Sur Linux
Be sure Bluetooth is enabled on the _Subsurface_ computer.  On most common
distributions this should be true out of the box and pairing should be
straightforward. For instance, Gnome3 shows a Bluetooth icon on the right of
the toolbar at the top of the screen.  Users have reported difficulties with
some Bluetooth controllers.  If you have an onboard controller, try that
first.  It is simplest if you remove any USB Bluetooth dongles.  If you have
a USB dongle that came with your dive computer, try that before any others.

Setting up a connection to download dives from your Bluetooth-enabled
device, such as the _Shearwater Petrel_, is not yet an automated process and
will generally require the command prompt.  It is essentially a three step
process.

 - Enable the Bluetooth controller and pair your dive computer
 - Establish an RFCOMM connection
 - Download the dives with Subsurface

Ensure the dive computer is in upload mode. On the _Shearwater Petrel_,
_Petrel 2_ and _Nerd_ cycle through the menu, select 'Dive Log', then
'Upload Log'.  The display will read 'Initializing', then 'Wait PC 3:00' and
will countdown.  Once the connection is established, the display reads 'Wait
CMD ...' and the countdown continues. When downloading the dive from
Subsurface, the display reads 'Sending' then 'Sent Dive'.

To establish the connection, establish root access through +sudo+ or +su+.
The correct permission is required to download the dives in the computer. On
most Linux systems this means becoming a member of the dialout group (This
is identical as for many dive computers using a Linux USB port, described in
the previous section). On the command terminal, enter:

+sudo usermod -a -G dialout username+

Then log out and log in for the change to take effect.

===== Enabling the Bluetooth controller and pairing your dive computer

Attempt to set up the Bluetooth controller and pair your dive computer using
the graphical environment of the operating system. After setting the dive
computer to upload mode, click the Bluetooth icon in the system tray and
select 'Add new device'. The dive computer should appear. If asked for a
password, enter 0000.  Write down or copy the MAC address of your dive
computer - this needed later and should be in the form 	00:11:22:33:44:55.

If the graphical method doesn't work, pair the device from the command
line. Open a terminal and use +hciconfig+ to check the Bluetooth controller
status

	$ hciconfig
	hci0:	Type: BR/EDR  Bus: USB
		BD Address: 01:23:45:67:89:AB  ACL MTU: 310:10  SCO MTU: 64:8
		*DOWN*
		RX bytes:504 acl:0 sco:0 events:22 errors:0
		TX bytes:92 acl:0 sco:0 commands:21 errors:0

This indicates a Bluetooth controller with MAC address 01:23:45:67:89:AB,
connected as hci0.  Its status is 'DOWN', i.e. not powered.  Additional
controllers will appear as hci1, etc.  If there is not a Bluetooth dongle
plugged in upon booting the computer, hci0 is probably the onboard.  Now
power on the controller and enable authentication:

	sudo hciconfig hci0 up auth+  (enter password when prompted)
	hciconfig
	hci0:  Type: BR/EDR  Bus: USB
		BD Address: 01:23:45:67:89:AB  ACL MTU: 310:10  SCO MTU: 64:8
		*UP RUNNING PSCAN AUTH*
		RX bytes:1026 acl:0 sco:0 events:47 errors:0
		TX bytes:449 acl:0 sco:0 commands:46 errors:0

Check that the status now includes +'UP', 'RUNNING' AND 'AUTH'+.

If there are multiple controllers running, it's easiest to off the unused
controller(s). For example, for +hci1+:

	sudo hciconfig hci1 down

Next step is to 'trust' and 'pair' the dive computer. On distros with Bluez
5, such as Fedora 22, you can use a tool called +blutootctl+, which will
bring up its own command prompt.

	bluetoothctl
	[NEW] Controller 01:23:45:67:89:AB localhost.localdomain [default]
	[bluetooth]# agent on
	Agent registered
	[bluetooth]# default-agent
	Default agent request successful
	[bluetooth]# scan on                        <----now set your dive computer to upload mode
	Discovery started
	[CHG] Controller 01:23:45:67:89:AB Discovering: yes
	[NEW] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 Petrel
	[bluetooth]# trust 00:11:22:33:44:55        <----you can use the tab key to autocomplete the MAC address
	[CHG] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 Trusted: yes
	Changing 00:11:22:33:44:55 trust succeeded
	[bluetooth]# pair 00:11:22:33:44:55
	Attempting to pair with 00:11:22:33:44:55
	[CHG] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 Connected: yes
	[CHG] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 UUIDs: 00001101-0000-1000-8000-0089abc12345
	[CHG] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 Paired: yes
	Pairing successful
	[CHG] Device 00:11:22:33:44:55 Connected: no

If asked for a password, enter 0000. It's ok if the last line says
'Connected: no'. The important part is the line above, +Pairing successful+.

If the system has Bluez version 4 (e.g. Ubuntu 12.04 through to 15.04),
there is probably not a +bluetoothctl+, but a script called
+bluez-simple-agent+ or just +simple-agent+.

	hcitool -i hci0 scanning
	Scanning ...
		00:11:22:33:44:55       Petrel
		bluez-simple-agent hci0 00:11:22:33:44:55

Once ther dive computer is pired, set up the RFCOMM connection

===== Establishing the RFCOMM connection

The command to establish an RFCOMM connection is:

+sudo rfcomm -i <controller> connect <dev> <bdaddr> [channel]+

- +<controller>+ is the Bluetooth controller, +hci0+.
- +<dev>+ is the RFCOMM device file, +rfcomm0+
- +<bdaddr>+ is the dive computer's MAC address, +00:11:22:33:44:55+
- +[channel]+ is the dive computer's Bluetooth channel we need to connect to.

If you omit it, channel 1 is assumed.  Based on a limited number of user
reports, the appropriate channel for the dive computer is probably:

- _Shearwater Petrel 1_: channel 1
- _Shearwater Petrel 2_: channel 5
- _Shearwater Nerd_: channel 5
- _Heinrichs-Weikamp OSTC Sport_: channel 1

E.g. to connect a _Shearwater Petrel 2_, set the dive computer to upload
mode and enter:

	sudo rfcomm -i hci0 connect rfcomm0 00:11:22:33:44:55 5 (enter a password, probably 0000, when prompted)

This gives the response:

	Connected /dev/rfcomm0 to 00:11:22:33:44:55 on channel 5
	Press CTRL-C for hangup

To connect a _Shearwater Petrel 1+ or + HW OSTC Sport+, set the dive
computer to upload mode and enter:

	sudo rfcomm -i hci0 connect rfcomm0 00:11:22:33:44:55   (enter a password, probably 0000, when prompted)
	Connected /dev/rfcomm0 to 00:11:22:33:44:55 on channel 1
	Press CTRL-C for hangup

If the specific channel the dive computer needs is not known, or the channel
in the list above doesn't work, the command +sdptool records+ should help
determine the appropriate channel. The output below is for a _Shearwater
Petrel 2_.

	sdptool -i hci0 records 00:11:22:33:44:55
	Service Name: Serial Port
	Service RecHandle: 0x10000
	Service Class ID List:
		"Serial Port" (0x1101)
		Protocol Descriptor List:
		"L2CAP" (0x0100)
		"RFCOMM" (0x0003)
		Channel: 5

For a Bluetooth dive computer not in the list above, or if the channel
listed is not correct, please let the Subsurface developers know on the user
forum or the developer mailing list _subsurface@subsurface-divelog.org_.

===== Download the dives with Subsurface
After establishing the RFCOMM connection and while the dive computer's
upload mode countdown is still running, go to_Subsurface_, select
_Import->Import from dive computer_ and enter appropriate Vendor
(e.g. _Shearwater_), Dive Computer (_Petrel_), Device or Mount Point
(_/dev/rfcomm0_) and click _Download_.




[[_appendix_b_dive_computer_specific_information_for_importing_dive_information]]

== APPENDIX B: Dive Computer specific information for importing dive data.

[[S_ImportUemis]]
=== Importing from Uemis Zurich

[icon="images/icons/iumis.jpg"]
[NOTE]
_Subsurface_ downloads the information stored on the SDA (the built-in file
system of the Uemis) including information about dive spots and
equipment. Buddy information is not yet downloadable.  Things are very
similar to a normal USB-connected dive computer (the Uemis is one of those
that recharge when connected to the USB port).  The main difference is that
you don’t enter a device name, but instead the location where the UEMISSDA
file system is mounted once connected to the dive computer. On Windows this
is a drive letter ( often 'E:' or 'F:'), on a Mac this is
'/Volumes/UEMISSDA' and on Linux systems this differs depending on the
distribution. On Fedora it usually is
'/var/run/media/<your_username>/UEMISSDA'. In all cases _Subsurface_ should
suggest the correct location in the drop down list.

After selecting the above device name, download the dives from the Uemis
Zurich. One technical issue with the Uemis Zurich download implementation
(this is a Uemis firmware limitation, not a _Subsurface_ issue) is that you
cannot download more than about 40-50 dives without running out of memory on
the SDA. This will usually only happen the very first time you download
dives from the Uemis Zurich.  Normally when downloading at the end of a day
or even after a dive trip, the capacity is sufficient. If _Subsurface_
displays an error that the dive computer ran out of space, the solution is
straightforward.  Disconnect the SDA, turn it off and on again, and
reconnect it. You can now retry (or start a new download session) and the
download will continue where it stopped previously. You may have to do this
more than once, depending on how many dives are stored on the dive computer.

[[S_ImportingGalileo]]
=== Importing from Uwatec Galileo

[icon="images/icons/Galileo.jpg"]
[NOTE]
The Uwatec Galileo dive computers use infra red (IrDA) communication between
the dive computer and Subsurface. The Uwatec hardware uses a USB dongle
based on the serial infra-red (SIR) protocol and the MSC7780 IrDA controller
manufactured by MosChip and marketed by Scubapro and some electronics
companies.  Under Linux, the kernel already provides for communication using
the IrDA protocol. However, the user additionally needs to load a driver for
the IrDA interface with the dive computer. The easiest way is to load the
*irda-tools* package from the
http://irda.sourceforge.net/docs/startirda.html[Linux IrDA Project].  After
the installation of the irda-tools, the *root user* can specify a device
name from the console as follows: +irattach irda0+

After executing this command, Subsurface will recognize the Galileo dive
computer and download dive information.

Under Windows, a similar situation exists. Drivers for the MCS7780 are
available from some Internet web sites e.g.
http://www.drivers-download.com/Drv/MosChip/MCS7780/[www.drivers-download.com].
Windows-based IrDA drivers for the Uwatec can also be downloaded from the
ScubaPro web site, with drivers located on the download page for the
ScubaPro SmartTrak software.

For the Apple Mac, IrDA communication via the MCS7780 link is not available
for OSX 10.6 or higher.

[[S_ImportingDR5]]
=== Importing from Heinrichs Weikamp DR5

[icon="images/icons/HW_DR5.jpg"]
[NOTE]
When mounted as a USB drive the Heinrichs Weikamp DR5 saves a single UDDF
file for every dive.  Mark all the dives you'd like to import or open.
Note: The DR5 does not seem to store gradient factors nor deco information,
so for _Subsurface_ it is not possible to display them. Adjust the gradient
factors in the _Graph Settings_ in _Subsurface_ to generate a deco overlay
in the _Subsurface_ *Dive Profile* panel but please note that the deco
calculated by _Subsurface_ will most likely differ from the one displayed on
the DR5.


[[S_ImportingXDeep]]
=== Importing from xDEEP BLACK

[icon="images/icons/HW_xdeepblack.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Each dive has to be individually saved as UDDF file using "Export UDDF"
option in BLACK's logbook menu.  When mounted as a USB drive UDDF files are
available in LOGBOOK directory.  Note: The xDEEP BLACK saves NDL time but
does not seem to store gradient factors nor deco information, so for
_Subsurface_ it is not possible to display them. Adjust the gradient factors
in the _Graph Settings_ in _Subsurface_ to generate a deco overlay in the
_Subsurface_ *Dive Profile* panel but please note that the deco calculated
by _Subsurface_ will most likely differ from the one displayed on the xDEEP
BLACK.


=== Importing from Shearwater Predator/Petrel/Nerd using Bluetooth

[icon="images/icons/predator.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Specific instructions for downloading dives using Bluetooth are given in the
section above, <<S_Bluetooth,_Connecting Subsurface to a Bluetooth-enabled
dive computer_>>.

[[S_PoseidonMkVI]]
=== Importing from Poseidon MkVI Discovery

[icon="images/MkVI.jpeg"]
[NOTE]
Download of dive logs from the MkVI is performed using a custom
communications adapter and the _Poseidon PC Configuration Software_,
obtained when purchasing the MKVI equipment. The latter is a Windows
application allowing configuration of equipment and storage of dive
logs. Communication between dive computer and desktop computer utilizes the
IrDA infra-red protocol. Only data for one dive can be downloaded at a time,
in three files:

- Setup configuration for the dive and key dive parameters (file with a .txt
  extension)
- Dive log details (file with a .csv extension)
- Redbook format dive log (file with .cvsr extension). This is a compressed
  version of the dive log using a proprietary format.

_Subsurface_ accesses the .txt and the .csv files to get dive log
information.


=== Importing from APD Inspiration/Evolution CCR

[icon="images/APDComputer.jpg"]
[NOTE]
The dive logs of an APD Inspiration or similar CCR dive computer are
downloaded using a communications adapter and _AP Communicator_, obtained
when purchasing the equipment. The dive logs can be viewed using the _AP Log
Viewer_, within Windows or Mac/OS. However, APD logs can be viewed and
managed from within _Subsurface_ (together with dives using many other types
of dive computer). The APD inspiration dive logs are imported into
_Subsurface_ as follows:

- Download the dive using _AP Communicator_.
- Open a dive within the _AP Log Viewer_.
- Select the tab at the top of the screen, entitled "_Data_".
- With the raw dive log data show on the screen, click on "_Copy to
  Clipboard_".
- Open a text editor, e.g. Notepad (Windows) or TextWrangler (Mac).
- Copy the contents of the clipboard into the text editor and save the text
  file with a filename extension of _.apd_
- Within _Subsurface_, select _Import -> Import log files_ to open the
  xref:Unified_import[universal import dialogue].
- In the dropdown list towards the bottom right of the dialogue (labeled
  'Filter:'), select "APD log viewer".
On the list of file names select the _.apd_ file  created. An import
dialogue opens showing the default settings for the data in the
_.apd_ file. If changes are required,
  do this as for xref:S_ImportingCSVDives[CSV imports].

image::images/APD_CSVimportF22.jpg["Figure: APD log viewer import", align="center"]

- The top left hand dropdown box in the import panel lets you select the APD
  dive computer for which the dive log needs to be imported. The default it is
  DC1, _i.e._ the first of the two dive computers the APD uses. It is possible
  to sequentially import the data for both dive computers by first importing
  CD1 and then DC2.(*Hint*: The logs for the two dive computers are viewed by
  selecting _View -> Next DC_ from the Main Menu after the uploading has been
  completed)
- Click the _Ok_ button at the bottom of the import panel.

The APD dive log will appear within _Subsurface_. The dive computer-
generated ceiling provided by the Inspiration can be viewed by selecting the
appropriate button on the left of the *Dive Profile*. Cylinder pressure data
are not logged by the APD equipment but can be manually entered in the
_Equipment_ Tab.

== APPENDIX C: Exporting Dive log information from external dive log software.

The import of dive log data from external dive log software is mostly
performed using the dialogue found by selecting _Import_ from the Main Menu,
then clicking on _Import Log Files_. This is a single-step process, more
information about which can be found xref:Unified_import[here.] However, in
some cases, a two-step process may be required:

1. Export the foreign dive log data to format that is accessible from
  _Subsurface_.
2. Import the accessible dive log data into _Subsurface_.

This appendix provides some information about approaches to export dive log
data from foreign dive log software. The procedures below mostly apply to
Linux and/or Windows.

[[S_ImportingDivesSuunto]]
=== Exporting from *Suunto Divemanager (DM3, DM4 or DM5)*
[icon="images/icons/suuntologo.jpg"]
[NOTE]
DiveManager is a MS Windows application for Suunto dive computers.
Divemanager 3 (DM3) is an older version of the Suunto software. More recent
Suunto dive computers use Divemanager version 4 or 5 (DM4 or DM5). The
different versions of Divemanager use different methods and different file
naming conventions to export dive log data.

*Divemanager 3 (DM3):*

1. Start 'Suunto Divemanager 3' and log in with the name containing the logs
2. Do not start the import wizard to import dives from the dive computer.
3. In the navigation tree on the left side of the program-window, select the
   appropriate dives.
4. Within the list of dives, select the dives you would like to import later:
	* To select certain dives: hold 'ctrl' and click the dive
	* To select all dives: Select the first dive, hold down shift and select the
	  last dive
5. With the dives marked, use the program menu _File -> Export_
6. The export pop-up will show. Within this pop-up, there is one field called
   'Export Path'.
	* Click the browse button next to the field Export Path
		** A file-manager like window pops up
		** Navigate to the directory for storing the
   Divelog.SDE file
		** Optionally change the name of the file for saving
		** Click 'Save'
	* Back in the Export pop-up, press the button 'Export'
7. The dives are now exported to the file Divelog.SDE.

*Divemanager 4 (DM4) and Divemanager 5 (DM5):*

DM4 and DM5 use identical mechanisms for exporting dive logs.  To export a
divelog from Divemanager you need to locate the DM4/DM5 database where the
dives are stored. You can either look for the original database or make a
backup of the dives. Both methods are described here.

Locating the Suunto DM4 (or DM5) database:

1. Start Suunto DM4/DM5
2. Select 'Help -> About'
3. Click 'Copy' after text 'Copy log folder path to clipboard'
4. Ouvrir l'explorateur Windows
5. Paste the address to the path box at the top of the File Explorer
6. The database is called DM4.db or DM5.db

Making a backup copy of the Suunto DM4/DM5 database:

1. Start Suunto DM4/DM5
2. Select 'File - Create backup'
3. From the file menu select the location and name for the backup, we'll use
   DM4 (or DM5) in here with the default extension .bak
4. Click 'Save'
5. The dives are now exported to the file DM4.bak (or DM5.bak)


=== Exporting from Atomic Logbook
[[Atomic_Export]]

[icon="images/icons/atomiclogo.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Atomic Logbook is a Windows software by Atomic Aquatics. It allows
downloading of dive information from Cobalt and Cobalt 2 dive computers.
The divelog is kept in a SQLite database at
C:\ProgramData\AtomicsAquatics\Cobalt-Logbook\Cobalt.db. This file can be
directly imported to Subsurface.


=== Exporting from Mares Dive Organiser V2.1
[[Mares_Export]]

[icon="images/icons/mareslogo.jpg"]
[NOTE]
Mares Dive Organizer is a Windows application. The dive log is kept as a
Microsoft SQL Compact Edition database with a '.sdf' filename extension. The
database includes all Dive Organizer-registered divers on the particular
computer and all Mares dive computers used. The safest way to get a copy of
the dive database is to export the information to another compatible format
which can then be imported into _Subsurface_.

1. Within Dive Organizer, select _Database -> Backup_ from the main menu and
   back up the database to the desk top.  This creates a zipped file
   DiveOrganizerxxxxx.dbf.
2. Rename the file to DiveOrganizerxxxxx.zip. Inside the zipped directory is a
   file _DiveOrganizer.sdf_.
3. Extract the _.sdf_ file from the zipped folder to your Desktop.
4. The password for accessing the .zip file is _mares_.

[[S_ImportingDivingLog]]
=== Exporting from *DivingLog 5.0 and 6.0*

[icon="images/icons/divingloglogo.jpg"]
[NOTE]
The best way to bring your logs from DivingLog to Subsurface is to convert
the whole database. This is because other export formats do not include all
the details, and would lack, for example, gas switches and information of
what units are used. With database import, all this information is included
and readily available.

To transfer all files from DivingLog to Subsurface:

1. In DivingLog open the 'File -> Export -> SQLite' menu
2. Select 'Settings' button
3. Set the 'RTF2Plaintext' to 'true'
4. Close the Settings dialog
5. Click 'Export' button and select the filename

Once this is done, open the saved database file with Subsurface and the
dives are automatically converted to Subsurface’s own format. Last step to
do is save the log file in Subsurface.

== ANNEXE D : Exporter un tableur vers le format CSV
[[S_Appendix_D]]

De nombreux plongeurs conservent un carnet de plongée sous forme de fichier
numérique, souvent un tableur avec différents champs et informations. Ces
données peuvent facilement être importées dans _Subsurface_ après que le
tableur a été converti en fichier CSV. Cette section explique la procedure
pour convertir un carnet de plongée enregistrée sous forme de tableur vers
un fichier CSV qui pourra ensuite être importé dans _Subsurface_. Créer un
fichier CSV est simple malgré que la procédure soit différente selon le
tableur utilisé.

Organiser les données de plongées dans le tableur pour que la première ligne
contienne le nom (ou le titre) de chaque colonne et que les informations de
chaque plongée soient contenues sur une seule ligne. _Subsurface_ supporte
de nombreux éléments (Dive #, Date, Time, Duration, Location, GPS, Max
Depth, Mean Depth, Buddy, Notes, Weight et Tags).  Organiser les données de
plongées selon quelques règles simples :

1. Date : utiliser un des formats suivants : aaaa-mm-jj, jj.mm.aaaa, mm/jj/aaaa
2. Durée : le format est minutes:secondes.
3. Système d'unité : un seul système d'unité doit être utilisé (pas de mélange
   entre les unités impériales et métriques)
4. Étiquettes et équipiers : les valeurs doivent être séparées par des
   virgules.
5. Position GPS : utilisez les degrés décimaux, par exemple : 30.22496
   30.821798
=== _LibreOffice Calc_ et _OpenOffice Calc_

These are open source spreadsheet applications forming parts of larger open
source office suite applications. The user interaction with _LibreOffice_
and _OpenOffice_ is very similar.  In Libreoffice Calc the time format
should be set to minutes:seconds - [mm]:ss and dates should be set to one
of: yyyy-mm-dd, dd.mm.yyyy, mm/dd/yyyy. A typical dive log may look like
this:

image::images/LOffice_spreadsheetdata.jpg["FIGURE: Spreadsheet data", align="center"]

To export the data as a .CSV file from within LibreOffice click _File ->
Save As_. On the dialogue that comes up, select the _Text CSV (.csv)_ as the
file type and select the option _Edit filter settings_.

image::images/LOffice_save_as_options.jpg["FIGURE: Save as options", align="center"]

After selecting _Save_, select the appropriate field delimiter (choose _Tab_
to prevent conflicts with the comma when using this as a decimal point),
then select _OK_.

image::images/LOffice_field_options.jpg["FIGURE: Field options", align="center"]

Double check the .CSV file by opening it with a text editor, and then import
the dive data as explained on the section xref:S_ImportingCSVDives[Importing
CSV dives].

=== Microsoft _Excel_

The field delimiter (called "_list separator_" in Microsoft manuals) is not
accessible from within _Excel_ and needs to be set through the _Microsoft
Control Panel_. After changing the separator character, all software on the
Windows machine uses the new character as a separator.  You can change the
character back to the default character by following the same procedure,
outlined below.

- In Microsoft Windows, click the *Start* button, then select _Control Panel_
  from the list on the right-hand side.
- Open the _Regional and Language Options_ dialog box.
- Do one of the following: ** In Windows 7, click the _Formats_ tab, and then
  click _Customize this format_.  ** In Windows XP, click the _Regional
  Options_ tab, and then click _Customize_.
- Type a new separator in the _List separator_ box. To use a TAB-delimited
  file, type the word TAB in the box.
- Click _OK_ twice.

Below is an image of the _Control Panel_:

image::images/Win_SaveCSV2.jpg["FIGURE: Win List separator", align="center"]

To export the dive log in CSV format:

With the dive log opened in _Excel_, select the round Windows button at the
top left, then _Save As_.

image::images/Win_SaveCSV1.jpg["FIGURE: Excel save as option", align="center"]

Click on the left-hand part of the _Save as_ option, NOT on the arrow on the
right-hand. This brings up a dialogue for saving the spreadsheet in an
alternative format. From the dropdown list at the bottom of the dialogue,
marked _Save as Type:_, select _CSV(Comma delimited) (*.CSV)_. Be sure the
appropriate folder has been selected to save the CSV file into.

image::images/Win_SaveCSV3.jpg["FIGURE: Excel save CSV dialogue", align="center"]

Select the _Save_ button. The CSV-formatted file is saved into the folder
that was selected. You can double check the .CSV file by opening it with a
text editor, then import the dive data as explained on the section
xref:S_ImportingCSVDives[Importing CSV dives].
[[S_APPENDIX_E]]
== ANNEXE E : Créer un modèle d'impression personnalisé

_Subsurface_ has a way to create or modify templates for printing dive logs
to produce customized printouts of them. Templates written in HTML, as well
as a simple Grantlee instruction set, are rendered to the print device by
_Subsurface_.

Templates are accessed using the print dialogue (see image *B* below).

image::images/Print1_f22.jpg["FIGURE: Print dialogue", align="center"]

The buttons under the _Template_ dropdown box lets you _Edit_, _Delete_,
_Import_ and _Export_ templates (see image *A* above). New or modified
templates are stored as HTML files in the same directory as the dive log
being processed. In order to create or modify a template, select one of the
templates from the template dropdown list in the print dialogue (see image
*B* above). Choose an existing template that resembles the final desired
printout. Then select _Edit_.

The Edit Panel has three tabs:

image::images/Template1_f22.jpg["FIGURE: template edit dialogue", align="center"]

1) The _Style_ tab (image *A* above) controls the font, line spacing and color
   template used for printing the dive log.  The style attributes are
   editable. Choose one of the four color palettes used for color printing.

2) The _Colors_ tab (image *B* above) allows editing the colors used for
   printing the dive log. The colors are highly customizable: the _Edit_
   buttons in the _Colors_ tab allows choosing arbitrary colors for different
   components of the dive log printout.

3) The _Template_ tab of the Edit Panel (see image below) allows creating a
   template using HTML as well as a few Grantlee programming
   primitives. Grantlee can create and format HTML code in a highly simple but
   efficient way (see below). The HTML of the template can be edited and
   saved. The saved template is stored in the same directory as the dive being
   processed. By default, a _Custom_ template is a skeleton with no specific
   print instructions. The information printed needs to be specified and
   formatted in the template by replacing the section marked with: "<!--
   Template must be filled -->". Writing HTML code with Grantlee instructions
   allows unlimited freedom in determining what is printed and in which way it
   should be rendered.

image::images/Template2_f22.jpg["FIGURE:Template tab", align="center"]

You can adapt any of the existing templates and save it to the dive log
directory. The standard templates (e.g. One dive, Six dives, Table) can be
modified in this way. After completing the edits, use the _Export_ button in
the print dialogue to save the new template using a new template name.

To write a custom template, the following elements must exist so the
template will be correctly handled and rendered.

=== Main dive loop
_Subsurface_ exports a dive list called (*dives*) to the _Grantlee_ back
end. It is possible to iterate over the list as follows:
.template.html
....
	{% for dive in dives %}
		<h1> {{ dive.number }} </h1>
	{% endfor %}
....

.output.html
....
	<h1> 1 </h1>
	<h1> 2 </h1>
	<h1> 3 </h1>
....

Additional information about _Grantlee_ can be found at
http://www.grantlee.org/apidox/for_themers.html[here]

=== Grantlee exported variables
Only a subset of the dive data is exported:
|====================
|*Name*|*Description*
|number| (*int*) dive number
|id| (*int*) unique dive ID, should be used to fetch the dive profile
|date| (*string*) date of the dive
|time| (*string*) time of the dive
|location| (*string*) location of the dive
|duration| (*string*) duration of the dive
|depth| (*string*) depth of the dive
|divemaster| (*string*) dive master for the dive
|buddy| (*string*) buddy for the dive
|airTemp| (*string*) air temperature of the dive
|waterTemp| (*string*) water temperature of the dive
|notes| (*string*) dive notes
|rating| (*int*) dive rating which ranges from 0 to 5
|sac| (*string*) SAC value for the dive
|tags| (*string*) list of dive tags for the dive
|gas| (*string*) list of gases used in the dive
|suit| (*string*) the suit used for the dive
|cylinders| (*string*) complete information of all used cylinders
|cylinder0-7| (*string*) information about a specific cylinder
|weights| (*string*) complete information of all used weight systems
|weight0-5| (*string*) information about a specific weight system
|maxcns| (*string*) maxCNS value for the dive
|otu| (*string*) OTU value for the dive
|sumWeight| (*string*) the summed weight of all used weight systems
|startPressure| (*string*) the start pressure
|endPressure| (*string*) the end pressure
|firstGas| (*string*) first used gas
|=====================

_Subsurface_ also exports *template_options* data. This data must be used as
_CSS_ values to provide a dynamically editable template. The exported data
is shown in the following table:
|====================
|*Name*|*Description*
|font| (*string*) font family
|borderwidth| (*int*) border-width value dynamically calculated as 0.1% of the page width with minimum value of 1px
|font_size| (*double*) size of fonts in vw, ranges between 1.0 and 2.0
|line_spacing| (*double*) distance between text lines, ranges between 1.0 and 3.0
|color1| (*string*) background color
|color2| (*string*) primary table cell color
|color3| (*string*) secondary table cell color
|color4| (*string*) primary text color
|color5| (*string*) secondary text color
|color6| (*string*) border colors
|=====================

.template.html
....
	border-width: {{ template_options.borderwidth }}px;
....

.output.html
....
	border-width: 3px;
....

Another variable that _Subsurface_ exports is *print_options*. This variable
contains a single member:
|=====================
|*Name*|*Description*
|grayscale | Use _CSS_ filters to convert the page into grayscale (should be added to body style to enable printing grayscale prints)
|=====================


.template.html
....
	body {
		{{ print_options.grayscale }};
	}
....

.output.html
....
	body {
		-webkit-filter: grayscale(100%);
	}
....

=== Defined CSS selectors
As the dive profile is placed after rendering, _Subsurface_ uses special
_CSS_ selectors to searche in the HTML output. The _CSS_ selectors in the
following table should be added.

|====================
|*Selector*|*Type*|*Description*
|dive_{{ dive.id }} | id | is used to fetch the relevant dive profile
|diveProfile | class | each dive that will contain a dive profile should have this class selector in addition to the dive_{{ dive.id }} id selector
|dontbreak | class | prevents the dive with this class from being divided into two pages. This can be used
in flow layout templates only (when data-numberofdives = 0)
|=====================

IMPORTANT: Rendering dive profiles is not supported for flow layout templates (when
data-numberofdives = 0).

=== Special attributes

There are two ways of rendering- either rendering a specific number of dives
in each page or make _Subsurface_ try to fit as many dives as possible into
one page (_flow_ rendering).

The *data-numberofdives* data attribute is added to the body tag to set the
rendering mode.

- render 6 dives per page:

....
	<body data-numberofdives = 6>
....

- render as much dives as possible:

....
	<body data-numberofdives = 0>
....

IMPORTANT: All CSS units should be in relative lengths only, to support printing on any
page size.

== APPENDIX F: FAQs.
[[S_APPENDIX_F]]
=== Subsurface appears to miscalculate gas consumption and SAC
[[SAC_CALCULATION]]
'Question': I dived with a 12.2 l tank, starting with 220 bar and ending
with 100 bar, and I calculate a different SAC compared what _Subsurface_
calculates. Is _Subsurface_ miscalculating?

'Answer': Not really. What happens is that _Subsurface_ actually calculates
gas consumption differently - and better - than you expect.  In particular,
it takes the incompressibility of the gas into account.  Traditionally, gas
consumption and SAC should be: +consumption = tank size x (start pressure -
end pressure)+

and that's true for an ideal gas, and it's what you get taught in dive
theory.  But an "ideal gas" doesn't actually exist, and real gases actually
don't compress linearly with pressure. Also, you are missing the fact that
one atmosphere of pressure isn't actually one bar.  So the *real*
calculation is:

+consumption = (amount_of_air_at_beginning - amount_of_air_at_end)+

where the amount of air is *not* just "tank size times pressure in bar".
It's a combination of: "take compressibility into account" (which is a
fairly small issue under 220 bar - you'll see more differences when you do
high-pressure tanks with 300bar) and "convert bar to atm" (which is the
majority of your discrepancy).  Remember: one ATM is ~1.013 bar, so without
the compressibility, your gas use is:

+12.2*((220-100)/1.013)+

which is about 1445, not 1464. So there was 19 l too much in your simple
calculation that ignored the difference between 1 bar and one ATM.  The
compressibility does show up above 200 bar, and takes that 1445 down about
eight litres more, so you really did use only about 1437 l of air at surface
pressure.

So be happy: your SAC really is better than your calculations indicated.  Or
be sad: your cylinder contains less air than you thought it did.  And as
mentioned, the "contains less air than you thought it did" really starts
becoming much more noticeable at high pressure. A 400 bar really does not
contain twice as much air as a 200 bar one. At lower pressures, air acts
pretty much like an ideal gas.

=== Some dive profiles have time discrepancies with the recorded samples from my dive computer...

_Subsurface_ ends up ignoring surface time for many things (average depth,
divetime, SAC, etc).  'Question': Why do dive durations in my dive computer
differ from that given by _Subsurface_?

'Answer': For example, if you end up doing a weight check (deep enough to
trigger the "dive started")  but then come back up and wait five minutes for
your buddies, your dive computer may say that your dive is 50 minutes long -
because you have fifty minutes worth of samples - but subsurface will say
it's 45 minutes - because you were actually diving for 45 minutes.  It's
even more noticeable if you do things like divemastering the initial OW
dives, when you may stay in the water for a long time, but spend most of it
at the surface. And then you don't want that to count as some kind of long
dive”.

=== Some dive profiles are missing from the download

[[DC_HISTORY]]
'Question': I cannot download all my dives, only the most recent ones, even
though my dive computer's manual states that it records history of e.g. 999
dives? 'Answer': Dive history is different than the dive profiles on the
log.  The history only keeps track of the total number of dives and total
amount of time spent below surface. The logs, on the other hand, store the
dive profile, but they have a limited amount of memory to do so. The exact
amount of dive profiles that can be stored on the device depends on sample
interval and duration of the dives. Once the memory is full the oldest dives
get overwritten with new dives. Thus we are only able to download the last
13, 30 or 199 dives.

If you have downloaded your dives to different dive logging software before
they were overwritten, there is a good chance that Subsurface can import
these. However, if the logs are only on your dive computer, they cannot be
salvaged after being overwritten by new dives.
